URL: https://quranx.com/hadith/Muslim/Hadith-2052
REFS: Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2052a ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 23, Hadith 5093 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2052b ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 23, Hadith 5094 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2052c ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 23, Hadith 5095 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2052d ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 23, Hadith 5096
EN: Jabir b. 'Abdullah reported that Allah's Apostle (ﷺ) asked his family for condiment. They (the members of his household) said: We have nothing with us but vinegar. He asked for it, he began to eat it, and then said: Vinegar is a good condiment, vinegar is a good condiment.
Jabir b. 'Abdullah reported: Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) took hold of my hand one day (and led me) to his residence. There was presented to him some pieces of bread, whereupon he said: Is there no condiment? They (the members of his household) said: No, except some vinegar. He (the Holy Prophet) said: Vinegar is a good condiment. Jabir said: I have always loved vinegar since I heard it trom Allah's Apostle (ﷺ). Talha said: I have always loved vinegar since I heard about it from Jabir.
This hadith is reported on the authority of Jabir b. 'Abdullah that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) took hold of his hand and led him to his residence as narrated above up to the words: " Vinegar is a good condiment." But in the hadith transmitted through this chain of transmitters, there is no mention of the subsequent part.
Jabir b. 'Abdullah reported: While I was sitting in my house there happened to pass by me Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). He made a gesture to me and I stood up for him. He took hold of my hand until we came to one of the apartments of his wives. He entered and then asked me to get in. So I entered and there was hanging a curtain beside her. He (the Holy Prophet) said: Is there any food (with you)? They (the members of the household) said: Yes And then there were brought three loaves of bread for him (the Holy Prophet) and placed in the basket of palm leaves. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) picked up one loaf and placed that before him, and then picked up another one and placed it before me. He then picked up the third one and broke it into two parts, and kept the one-half before him and the other half before me, and then said: Is there any condiment? They (the members of the household) said: There is nothing (in the form of condiment) but some vinegar only. He said: Bring that, for vinegar is a good condiment.
AR: حَدَّثَنَا يَحْيَى بْنُ يَحْيَى، أَخْبَرَنَا أَبُو عَوَانَةَ، عَنْ أَبِي بِشْرٍ، عَنْ أَبِي سُفْيَانَ، عَنْ جَابِرِ بْنِ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ، أَنَّ النَّبِيَّ صلى الله عليه وسلم سَأَلَ أَهْلَهُ الأُدُمَ فَقَالُوا مَا عِنْدَنَا إِلاَّ خَلٌّ ‏.‏ فَدَعَا بِهِ فَجَعَلَ يَأْكُلُ بِهِ وَيَقُولُ ‏ "‏ نِعْمَ الأُدُمُ الْخَلُّ نِعْمَ الأُدُمُ الْخَلُّ ‏" ‏ ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنِي يَعْقُوبُ بْنُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الدَّوْرَقِيُّ، حَدَّثَنَا إِسْمَاعِيلُ، - يَعْنِي ابْنَ عُلَيَّةَ - عَنِ الْمُثَنَّى بْنِ سَعِيدٍ، حَدَّثَنِي طَلْحَةُ بْنُ نَافِعٍ، أَنَّهُ سَمِعَ جَابِرَ بْنَ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ، يَقُولُ أَخَذَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم بِيَدِي ذَاتَ يَوْمٍ إِلَى مَنْزِلِهِ فَأَخْرَجَ إِلَيْهِ فِلَقًا مِنْ خُبْزٍ فَقَالَ ‏"‏ مَا مِنْ أُدُمٍ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ فَقَالُوا لاَ إِلاَّ شَىْءٌ مِنْ خَلٍّ ‏.‏ قَالَ ‏"‏ فَإِنَّ الْخَلَّ نِعْمَ الأُدُمُ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قَالَ جَابِرٌ فَمَا زِلْتُ أُحِبُّ الْخَلَّ مُنْذُ سَمِعْتُهَا مِنْ نَبِيِّ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏.‏ وَقَالَ طَلْحَةُ مَا زِلْتُ أُحِبُّ الْخَلَّ مُنْذُ سَمِعْتُهَا مِنْ جَابِرٍ ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنَا نَصْرُ بْنُ عَلِيٍّ الْجَهْضَمِيُّ، حَدَّثَنِي أَبِي، حَدَّثَنَا الْمُثَنَّى بْنُ سَعِيدٍ، عَنْ طَلْحَةَ، بْنِ نَافِعٍ حَدَّثَنَا جَابِرُ بْنُ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ، أَنَّ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم أَخَذَ بِيَدِهِ إِلَى مَنْزِلِهِ ‏.‏ بِمِثْلِ حَدِيثِ ابْنِ عُلَيَّةَ إِلَى قَوْلِهِ ‏ "‏ فَنِعْمَ الأُدُمُ الْخَلُّ ‏" ‏ ‏.‏ وَلَمْ يَذْكُرْ مَا بَعْدَهُ ‏.‏
وَحَدَّثَنَا أَبُو بَكْرِ بْنُ أَبِي شَيْبَةَ، حَدَّثَنَا يَزِيدُ بْنُ هَارُونَ، أَخْبَرَنَا حَجَّاجُ بْنُ أَبِي، زَيْنَبَ حَدَّثَنِي أَبُو سُفْيَانَ، طَلْحَةُ بْنُ نَافِعٍ قَالَ سَمِعْتُ جَابِرَ بْنَ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ، قَالَ كُنْتُ جَالِسًا فِي دَارِي فَمَرَّ بِي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فَأَشَارَ إِلَىَّ فَقُمْتُ إِلَيْهِ فَأَخَذَ بِيَدِي فَانْطَلَقْنَا حَتَّى أَتَى بَعْضَ حُجَرِ نِسَائِهِ فَدَخَلَ ثُمَّ أَذِنَ لِي فَدَخَلْتُ الْحِجَابَ عَلَيْهَا فَقَالَ ‏"‏ هَلْ مِنْ غَدَاءٍ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ فَقَالُوا نَعَمْ ‏.‏ فَأُتِيَ بِثَلاَثَةِ أَقْرِصَةٍ فَوُضِعْنَ عَلَى نَبِيٍّ فَأَخَذَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم قُرْصًا فَوَضَعَهُ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ وَأَخَذَ قُرْصًا آخَرَ فَوَضَعَهُ بَيْنَ يَدَىَّ ثُمَّ أَخَذَ الثَّالِثَ فَكَسَرَهُ بِاثْنَيْنِ فَجَعَلَ نِصْفَهُ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ وَنِصْفَهُ بَيْنَ يَدَىَّ ثُمَّ قَالَ ‏"‏ هَلْ مِنْ أُدُمٍ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قَالُوا لاَ ‏.‏ إِلاَّ شَىْءٌ مِنْ خَلٍّ ‏.‏ قَالَ ‏"‏ هَاتُوهُ فَنِعْمَ الأُدُمُ هُوَ ‏"‏ ‏.‏
