URL: https://quranx.com/hadith/Muslim/Hadith-144
REFS: Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 144a ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 1, Hadith 267 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 144b ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 1, Hadith 268 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 144c ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 1, Hadith 269 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 144d ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 41, Hadith 6914 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 144e ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 41, Hadith 6915 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 144f ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 41, Hadith 6916
EN: It is narrated on the authority of Hudhaifa: We were sitting in the company of Umar and he said: Who amongst you has heard the Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) talking about the turmoil? Some people said: It is we who heard it. Upon this be remarked: Perhaps by turmoil you presume the unrest of man in regard to his household or neighbour, they replied: Yes. He ('Umar) observed: Such (an unrest) would be done away with by prayer, fasting and charity. But who amongst you has heard from the Apostle (ﷺ) describing that turmoil which would come like the wave of the ocean. Hudhaifa said: The people hushed into silence, I replied: It is I. He ('Umar) said: Ye, well, your father was also very pious. Hudhaifa said: I heard the Messenger of Allah (may peace be, upon him ) observing: Temptations will be presented to men's hearts as reed mat is woven stick by stick and any heart which is impregnated by them will have a black mark put into it, but any heart which rejects them will have a white mark put in it. The result is that there will become two types of hearts: one white like a white stone which will not be harmed by any turmoil or temptation, so long as the heavens and the earth endure; and the other black and dust-coloured like a vessel which is upset, not recognizing what is good or rejecting what is abominable, but being impregnated with passion. Hudhaifa said: I narrated to him ('Umar): There is between you and that (turmoil) a closed door, but there is every likelihood of its being broken. 'Umar said: Would it be broken? You have, been rendered fatherless. Had it been opened, it would have been perhaps closed also. I said: No, it would be broken, and I narrated to him: Verily that door implies a person who would be killed or die. There is no mistake in this hadith. Abu Khalid narrated: I said to Sa'd, O Abu Malik, what do you mean by the term" Aswad Murbadda"? He replied: High degree of whiteness in blackness. I said: What is meant by" Alkoozu Mujakhiyyan"? He replied: A vessel turned upside down.
It is narrated on the authority of Rib'i (b. Hirash). When Hudhaifa came from 'Umar he sat down to narrate to us and said: Verily yesterday when I was sitting with the Commander of the believers he asked his companions: When amongst you retains in his memory the utterance of the Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) with regard to the turmoil? -and he cited the hadith like the hadith narrated on the authority of Abu Khalid, but he did not mention the exposition of his words (Murbaddan) and (Mujakhiyyan).
It is transmitted by Rib'i b. Hirash. who narrated it on the authority of Hudhaifa that verily 'Umar said: Who would narrate to us or who amongst you would narrate to us (and Hudhaifa was one amongst them) what the Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) had said about the turmoil? Hudhaifa said: I will, and recited the hadith like that transmitted by Abu Malik on the authority of Rib'i and he observed in connection with this hadith that Hudhaifa remarked: I am narrating to you a hadith and it has no mistake, and said: That it is transmitted from he Messenger of Allah (ﷺ).
Hudhaifa reported: We were one day in the company of 'Umar that he said: Who amongst you has preserved in his mind most perfectly the hadith of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) in regard to the turmoil as he told about it? I said: It is I. Thereupon he said: You are bold (enough to make this claim). And he further said: How? I said: I heard Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) as saying: There would (first) be turmoil for a person in regard to his family, his property, his own self, his children, his neighbours (and the sins committed in their connection) would be expiated by fasting, prayer, charity, enjoining good and prohibiting evil. Thereupon 'Umar said: I do not mean (that turmoil on a small scale) but that one which would emerge like the mounting waves of the ocean. I said: Commander of the Faithful, you have nothing to do with it, for the door is closed between you and that. He said: Would that door be broken or opened? I said: No, it would be broken. Thereupon he said: Then it would not be closed despite best efforts. We said to Hudhaifa: Did Umar know the door? Thereupon he said: Yes, he knew it (for certain) just as one knows that night precedes the next day. And I narrated to him something in which there was nothing fabricated. Shaqiq (one of the narrators) said: We dared not ask Hudhaifa about that door. So we requested Masruq to ask him. So he asked him and he said: (By that door, he meant) 'Umar.
This hadith has been narrated on the authority of Hudhaifa through other chains of transmitters also.
Hudhaifa reported that Umar said: Who would narrate to us (the ahadith pertaining to turmoil) and he reported a hadith similar to these ahadith.
AR: وَحَدَّثَنَا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ نُمَيْرٍ، حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو خَالِدٍ، - يَعْنِي سُلَيْمَانَ بْنَ حَيَّانَ - عَنْ سَعْدِ بْنِ طَارِقٍ، عَنْ رِبْعِيٍّ، عَنْ حُذَيْفَةَ، قَالَ كُنَّا عِنْدَ عُمَرَ فَقَالَ أَيُّكُمْ سَمِعَ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم يَذْكُرُ الْفِتَنَ فَقَالَ قَوْمٌ نَحْنُ سَمِعْنَاهُ ‏.‏ فَقَالَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْنُونَ فِتْنَةَ الرَّجُلِ فِي أَهْلِهِ وَجَارِهِ قَالُوا أَجَلْ ‏.‏ قَالَ تِلْكَ تُكَفِّرُهَا الصَّلاَةُ وَالصِّيَامُ وَالصَّدَقَةُ وَلَكِنْ أَيُّكُمْ سَمِعَ النَّبِيَّ صلى الله عليه وسلم يَذْكُرُ الْفِتَنَ الَّتِي تَمُوجُ مَوْجَ الْبَحْرِ قَالَ حُذَيْفَةُ فَأَسْكَتَ الْقَوْمُ فَقُلْتُ أَنَا ‏.‏ قَالَ أَنْتَ لِلَّهِ أَبُوكَ ‏.‏ قَالَ حُذَيْفَةُ سَمِعْتُ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم يَقُولُ ‏ "‏ تُعْرَضُ الْفِتَنُ عَلَى الْقُلُوبِ كَالْحَصِيرِ عُودًا عُودًا فَأَىُّ قَلْبٍ أُشْرِبَهَا نُكِتَ فِيهِ نُكْتَةٌ سَوْدَاءُ وَأَىُّ قَلْبٍ أَنْكَرَهَا نُكِتَ فِيهِ نُكْتَةٌ بَيْضَاءُ حَتَّى تَصِيرَ عَلَى قَلْبَيْنِ عَلَى أَبْيَضَ مِثْلِ الصَّفَا فَلاَ تَضُرُّهُ فِتْنَةٌ مَا دَامَتِ السَّمَوَاتُ وَالأَرْضُ وَالآخَرُ أَسْوَدُ مُرْبَادًّا كَالْكُوزِ مُجَخِّيًا لاَ يَعْرِفُ مَعْرُوفًا وَلاَ يُنْكِرُ مُنْكَرًا إِلاَّ مَا أُشْرِبَ مِنْ هَوَاهُ ‏" ‏ ‏.‏ قَالَ حُذَيْفَةُ وَحَدَّثْتُهُ أَنَّ بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَهَا بَابًا مُغْلَقًا يُوشِكُ أَنْ يُكْسَرَ ‏.‏ قَالَ عُمَرُ أَكَسْرًا لاَ أَبَا لَكَ فَلَوْ أَنَّهُ فُتِحَ لَعَلَّهُ كَانَ يُعَادُ ‏.‏ قُلْتُ لاَ بَلْ يُكْسَرُ ‏.‏ وَحَدَّثْتُهُ أَنَّ ذَلِكَ الْبَابَ رَجُلٌ يُقْتَلُ أَوْ يَمُوتُ ‏.‏ حَدِيثًا لَيْسَ بِالأَغَالِيطِ ‏.‏ قَالَ أَبُو خَالِدٍ فَقُلْتُ لِسَعْدٍ يَا أَبَا مَالِكٍ مَا أَسْوَدُ مُرْبَادًّا قَالَ شِدَّةُ الْبَيَاضِ فِي سَوَادٍ ‏.‏ قَالَ قُلْتُ فَمَا الْكُوزُ مُجَخِّيًا قَالَ مَنْكُوسًا ‏.‏
وَحَدَّثَنِي ابْنُ أَبِي عُمَرَ، حَدَّثَنَا مَرْوَانُ الْفَزَارِيُّ، حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو مَالِكٍ الأَشْجَعِيُّ، عَنْ رِبْعِيٍّ، قَالَ لَمَّا قَدِمَ حُذَيْفَةُ مِنْ عِنْدِ عُمَرَ جَلَسَ فَحَدَّثَنَا فَقَالَ إِنَّ أَمِيرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَمْسِ لَمَّا جَلَسْتُ إِلَيْهِ سَأَلَ أَصْحَابَهُ أَيُّكُمْ يَحْفَظُ قَوْلَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فِي الْفِتَنِ وَسَاقَ الْحَدِيثَ بِمِثْلِ حَدِيثِ أَبِي خَالِدٍ وَلَمْ يَذْكُرْ تَفْسِيرَ أَبِي مَالِكٍ لِقَوْلِهِ ‏ "‏ مُرْبَادًّا مُجَخِّيًا ‏" ‏ ‏.‏
وَحَدَّثَنِي مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ الْمُثَنَّى، وَعَمْرُو بْنُ عَلِيٍّ، وَعُقْبَةُ بْنُ مُكْرَمٍ الْعَمِّيُّ، قَالُوا حَدَّثَنَا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ أَبِي عَدِيٍّ، عَنْ سُلَيْمَانَ التَّيْمِيِّ، عَنْ نُعَيْمِ بْنِ أَبِي هِنْدٍ، عَنْ رِبْعِيِّ بْنِ حِرَاشٍ، عَنْ حُذَيْفَةَ، أَنَّ عُمَرَ، قَالَ مَنْ يُحَدِّثُنَا أَوْ قَالَ أَيُّكُمْ يُحَدِّثُنَا - وَفِيهِمْ حُذَيْفَةُ - مَا قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فِي الْفِتْنَةِ قَالَ حُذَيْفَةُ أَنَا ‏.‏ وَسَاقَ الْحَدِيثَ كَنَحْوِ حَدِيثِ أَبِي مَالِكٍ عَنْ رِبْعِيٍّ وَقَالَ فِي الْحَدِيثِ قَالَ حُذَيْفَةُ حَدَّثْتُهُ حَدِيثًا لَيْسَ بِالأَغَالِيطِ وَقَالَ يَعْنِي أَنَّهُ عَنْ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنَا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ نُمَيْرٍ، وَمُحَمَّدُ بْنُ الْعَلاَءِ أَبُو كُرَيْبٍ، جَمِيعًا عَنْ أَبِي، مُعَاوِيَةَ قَالَ ابْنُ الْعَلاَءِ حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو مُعَاوِيَةَ، حَدَّثَنَا الأَعْمَشُ، عَنْ شَقِيقٍ، عَنْ حُذَيْفَةَ، قَالَ كُنَّا عِنْدَ عُمَرَ فَقَالَ أَيُّكُمْ يَحْفَظُ حَدِيثَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فِي الْفِتْنَةِ كَمَا قَالَ قَالَ فَقُلْتُ أَنَا ‏.‏ قَالَ إِنَّكَ لَجَرِيءٌ وَكَيْفَ قَالَ قَالَ قُلْتُ سَمِعْتُ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم يَقُولُ ‏ "‏ فِتْنَةُ الرَّجُلِ فِي أَهْلِهِ وَمَالِهِ وَنَفْسِهِ وَوَلَدِهِ وَجَارِهِ يُكَفِّرُهَا الصِّيَامُ وَالصَّلاَةُ وَالصَّدَقَةُ وَالأَمْرُ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَالنَّهْىُ عَنِ الْمُنْكَرِ ‏" ‏ ‏.‏ فَقَالَ عُمَرُ لَيْسَ هَذَا أُرِيدُ إِنَّمَا أُرِيدُ الَّتِي تَمُوجُ كَمَوْجِ الْبَحْرِ - قَالَ - فَقُلْتُ مَا لَكَ وَلَهَا يَا أَمِيرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِنَّ بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَهَا بَابًا مُغْلَقًا قَالَ أَفَيُكْسَرُ الْبَابُ أَمْ يُفْتَحُ قَالَ قُلْتُ لاَ بَلْ يُكْسَرُ ‏.‏ قَالَ ذَلِكَ أَحْرَى أَنْ لاَ يُغْلَقَ أَبَدًا ‏.‏ قَالَ فَقُلْنَا لِحُذَيْفَةَ هَلْ كَانَ عُمَرُ يَعْلَمُ مَنِ الْبَابُ قَالَ نَعَمْ كَمَا يَعْلَمُ أَنَّ دُونَ غَدٍ اللَّيْلَةَ إِنِّي حَدَّثْتُهُ حَدِيثًا لَيْسَ بِالأَغَالِيطِ ‏.‏ قَالَ فَهِبْنَا أَنْ نَسْأَلَ حُذَيْفَةَ مَنِ الْبَابُ فَقُلْنَا لِمَسْرُوقٍ سَلْهُ فَسَأَلَهُ فَقَالَ عُمَرُ ‏.‏
وَحَدَّثَنَاهُ أَبُو بَكْرِ بْنُ أَبِي شَيْبَةَ، وَأَبُو سَعِيدٍ الأَشَجُّ قَالاَ حَدَّثَنَا وَكِيعٌ، ح وَحَدَّثَنَا عُثْمَانُ بْنُ أَبِي شَيْبَةَ، حَدَّثَنَا جَرِيرٌ، ح وَحَدَّثَنَا إِسْحَاقُ بْنُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ، أَخْبَرَنَا عِيسَى بْنُ يُونُسَ، ح وَحَدَّثَنَا ابْنُ أَبِي عُمَرَ، حَدَّثَنَا يَحْيَى بْنُ عِيسَى، كُلُّهُمْ عَنِ الأَعْمَشِ، بِهَذَا الإِسْنَادِ ‏.‏ نَحْوَ حَدِيثِ أَبِي مُعَاوِيَةَ وَفِي حَدِيثِ عِيسَى عَنِ الأَعْمَشِ، عَنْ شَقِيقٍ، قَالَ سَمِعْتُ حُذَيْفَةَ، يَقُولُ ‏.‏
وَحَدَّثَنَا ابْنُ أَبِي عُمَرَ، حَدَّثَنَا سُفْيَانُ، عَنْ جَامِعِ بْنِ أَبِي رَاشِدٍ، وَالأَعْمَشُ، عَنْ أَبِي وَائِلٍ، عَنْ حُذَيْفَةَ، قَالَ قَالَ عُمَرُ مَنْ يُحَدِّثُنَا عَنِ الْفِتْنَةِ، وَاقْتَصَّ الْحَدِيثَ، بِنَحْوِ حَدِيثِهِمْ ‏.‏
