URL: https://quranx.com/hadith/Muslim/Hadith-2788
REFS: Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2788a ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 39, Hadith 6704 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2788b ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 39, Hadith 6705 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2788c ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 39, Hadith 6706
EN: Abdullah b. 'Umar reported Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) saying: Allah, the Exalted and Glorious, would fold the Heavens on the Day of Judgment and then He would place them on His right hand and say: I am the Lord; where are the haughty and where are the proud (today)? He would fold the' earth (placing it) on the left hand and say: I am the Lord; where are the haughty and where are the proud (today)?
Abdullah b. Miqsam reported that he saw Abdullah b. Umar as he narrated Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) as saying: Allah, the Exalted and Glorious, would take in His hand His Heavens and His Earth, and would say: I am Allah. And He would clench His fingers and then would open them (and say): I am your Lord. I saw the pulpit in commotion from underneath because of something (vib-ating) there. And (I felt this commotion so much) that I said (to myself): It may not fall with Allah's Massenger (ﷺ) upon it.
Abdullah b. Miqsam reported that 'Abdullah b. 'Umar reported: I saw Allah'h Messenger (ﷺ) upon the pulpit and he was saying that the Mighty Lord, the Exalted and Glorious would take hold of the Heavens and earth in His hand. The rest of the hadith is the same,
AR: وَحَدَّثَنَا أَبُو بَكْرِ بْنُ أَبِي شَيْبَةَ، حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو أُسَامَةَ، عَنْ عُمَرَ بْنِ حَمْزَةَ، عَنْ سَالِمِ، بْنِ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ أَخْبَرَنِي عَبْدُ اللَّهِ بْنُ عُمَرَ، قَالَ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏ "‏ يَطْوِي اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ السَّمَوَاتِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ثُمَّ يَأْخُذُهُنَّ بِيَدِهِ الْيُمْنَى ثُمَّ يَقُولُ أَنَا الْمَلِكُ أَيْنَ الْجَبَّارُونَ أَيْنَ الْمُتَكَبِّرُونَ ثُمَّ يَطْوِي الأَرَضِينَ بِشِمَالِهِ ثُمَّ يَقُولُ أَنَا الْمَلِكُ أَيْنَ الْجَبَّارُونَ أَيْنَ الْمُتَكَبِّرُونَ ‏" ‏ ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنَا سَعِيدُ بْنُ مَنْصُورٍ، حَدَّثَنَا يَعْقُوبُ، - يَعْنِي ابْنَ عَبْدِ الرَّحْمَنِ - حَدَّثَنِي أَبُو حَازِمٍ عَنْ عُبَيْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ مِقْسَمٍ، أَنَّهُ نَظَرَ إِلَى عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ عُمَرَ كَيْفَ يَحْكِي رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم قَالَ ‏ "‏ يَأْخُذُ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ سَمَوَاتِهِ وَأَرَضِيهِ بِيَدَيْهِ فَيَقُولُ أَنَا اللَّهُ - وَيَقْبِضُ أَصَابِعَهُ وَيَبْسُطُهَا - أَنَا الْمَلِكُ ‏" ‏ حَتَّى نَظَرْتُ إِلَى الْمِنْبَرِ يَتَحَرَّكُ مِنْ أَسْفَلِ شَىْءٍ مِنْهُ حَتَّى إِنِّي لأَقُولُ أَسَاقِطٌ هُوَ بِرَسُولِ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم
حَدَّثَنَا سَعِيدُ بْنُ مَنْصُورٍ، حَدَّثَنَا عَبْدُ الْعَزِيزِ بْنُ أَبِي حَازِمٍ، حَدَّثَنِي أَبِي، عَنْ عُبَيْدِ، اللَّهِ بْنِ مِقْسَمٍ عَنْ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ عُمَرَ، قَالَ رَأَيْتُ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم عَلَى الْمِنْبَرِ وَهُوَ يَقُولُ ‏ "‏ يَأْخُذُ الْجَبَّارُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ سَمَوَاتِهِ وَأَرَضِيهِ بِيَدَيْهِ ‏" ‏ ‏.‏ ثُمَّ ذَكَرَ نَحْوَ حَدِيثِ يَعْقُوبَ ‏.‏
