
Tafsirs for Qur'an 12.16 Yusuf (Joseph) يوسف
                Donate
                    MENU
Quran
Tafsirs
Hadiths
Search
Dictionaries
Help
About
The Quran
    Tafsirs for 
        12.16
Yusuf (Joseph) - 
يوسف
Chapter
                        1 - Al Fatiha (The opening)
                        2 - Al Baqara (The cow)
                        3 - Al Imran (The family of Imran)
                        4 - An Nisa (The women)
                        5 - Al Maida (The food)
                        6 - Al Anam (Cattle)
                        7 - Al Araf (The heights)
                        8 - Al Anfal (Spoils of war)
                        9 - Al Tawba (Immunity)
                        10 - Yunus (Jonah)
                        11 - Hud
                        12 - Yusuf (Joseph)
                        13 - Ar Rad (The thunder)
                        14 - Ibrahim (Abraham)
                        15 - Al Hijr (The rock)
                        16 - An Nahl (The bee)
                        17 - Bani Israil (The Israelites)
                        18 - Al Kahf (The cave)
                        19 - Maryamn (Mary)
                        20 - Ta-Ha
                        21 - Al Anbiya (The prophets)
                        22 - Al Hajj (The pilgrimage)
                        23 - Al Muminun (The believers)
                        24 - An Nur (The light)
                        25 - Al Furqan (The discrimination)
                        26 - Ash Shuara (The poets)
                        27 - An Naml (The ant)
                        28 - Al Qasas (The narrative)
                        29 - Al Ankabut (The spider)
                        30 - Ar Rum (The Romans)
                        31 - Luqman
                        32 - As Sajda (The adoration)
                        33 - Al Ahzab (The allies)
                        34 - Al Saba (The Saba)
                        35 - Al Fatir (The angels)
                        36 - Ya Sin
                        37 - As Saffat (Those who set up ranks)
                        38 - Saad
                        39 - Az Zumar (The troops)
                        40 - Al Ghafir (The forgiver)
                        41 - Fussilat (Explained in detail)
                        42 - Ash Shura (The council)
                        43 - Az Zukhruf (Gold)
                        44 - Ad Dukhan (Drought)
                        45 - Al Jathiya (Kneeling)
                        46 - Al Ahqaf (The dunes)
                        47 - Muhammad
                        48 - Al Fath (Victory)
                        49 - Al Hujraat (The apartments)
                        50 - Qaf
                        51 - Adh Dhariyat (The scatterers)
                        52 - At Tur (The mount)
                        53 - An Najm (The star)
                        54 - Al Qamar (The Moon)
                        55 - Ar Rahman (The beneficent)
                        56 - Al Waqia (The event)
                        57 - Al Hadid (Iron)
                        58 - Al Mujadila (The pleading woman)
                        59 - Al Hashr (Exile)
                        60 - Al Mumtahana (The examined woman)
                        61 - As Saff (The ranks)
                        62 - Al Jumua (The congregation)
                        63 - Al Munafiqun (The hypocrites)
                        64 - At Taghabun (Manifestation of losses)
                        65 - At Talaq (Divorce)
                        66 - At Tahrim (Prohibition)
                        67 - Al Mulk (The kingdom)
                        68 - Al Qalam (The pen)
                        69 - Al Haqqa (The reality)
                        70 - Al Maarij (Ascending stairways)
                        71 - Nuh (Noah)
                        72 - Al Jinn (The Jinn)
                        73 - Al Muzzammil (The enshrouded one)
                        74 - Al Muddaththir (The cloaked one)
                        75 - Al Qiyama (Resurrection)
                        76 - Al Insan (Man)
                        77 - Al Mursalat (The emissaries)
                        78 - An Naba (The tidings)
                        79 - An Naziat (Those who yearn)
                        80 - Abasa (He frowned)
                        81 - At Takwir (The folding up)
                        82 - Al Infitar (The cleaving)
                        83 - Al Mutaffifin (The cheats)
                        84 - Al Isnhiqaq (Splitting open)
                        85 - Al Buruj (The stars)
                        86 - At Tariq (The morning star)
                        87 - Al Ala (The most high)
                        88 - Al Ghashiya (The overwhelming)
                        89 - Al Fajr (The dawn)
                        90 - Al Balad (The city)
                        91 - Ash Shams (The Sun)
                        92 - Al Lail (The night)
                        93 - Ad Duhaa (The brightness of day)
                        94 - Al Inshirah (The expansion)
                        95 - At tin (The fig)
                        96 - Al Alaq (The clot)
                        97 - Al Qadr (The power)
                        98 - Al Bayyina (Clear proof)
                        99 - Al Zalzala (The shaking)
                        100 - Al Adiyat (The assaulters)
                        101 - Al Qaria (The calamity)
                        102 - At Takathur (Abundance of wealth)
                        103 - Al Asr (The time)
                        104 - Al Humaza (The slanderer)
                        105 - Al Fil (The elephant)
                        106 - Quraish (The Quraish)
                        107 - Al Maun (Almsgiving)
                        108 - Al Kauthar (Abundance)
                        109 - Al Kafirun (The disbelievers)
                        110 - An Nasr (Divine support)
                        111 - Al Lahab (The flame)
                        112 - Al Ikhlas (The unity)
                        113 - Al Falaq (Dawn)
                        114 - An Nas (Mankind)
Verse
« Prev
Go
Next »
12.16
            Abbas - Tanwîr al-Miqbâs min Tafsîr Ibn ‘Abbâs
(And they came weeping to their father in the evening) after midday.
12.16
            Jalal - Al-Jalalayn
And they came to their father in the evening weeping.
12.16-18
            Kathir - Ibn Al Kathir
Yusuf's Brothers try to deceive Their Father
Allah narrates to us the deceit that Yusuf's brothers resorted to, after they threw him to the bottom of the well. They went back to their father, during the darkness of the night, crying and showing sorrow and grief for losing Yusuf. They started giving excuses to their father for what happened to Yusuf, falsely claiming that,
إِنَّا ذَهَبْنَا نَسْتَبِقُ
(We went racing with one another), or had a shooting competition,
وَتَرَكْنَا يُوسُفَ عِندَ مَتَـعِنَا
(and left Yusuf by our belongings), guarding our clothes and luggage,
فَأَكَلَهُ الذِّئْبُ
(and a wolf devoured him), which is exactly what their father told them he feared for Yusuf and warned against. They said next,
وَمَآ أَنتَ بِمُؤْمِنٍ لَّنَا وَلَوْ كُنَّا صَـدِقِينَ
(but you will never believe us even when we speak the truth.) They tried to lessen the impact of the grave news they were delivering. They said, `We know that you will not believe this news, even if you consider us truthful. So what about when you suspect that we are not truthful, especially since you feared that the wolf might devour Yusuf and that is what happened' Therefore, they said, `You have reason not to believe us because of the strange coincidence and the amazing occurrence that happened to us. '
وَجَآءُوا عَلَى قَمِيصِهِ بِدَمٍ كَذِبٍ
(And they brought his shirt stained with false blood.) on it, to help prove plot that they all agreed on. They slaughtered a sheep, according to Mujahid, As-Suddi and several other scholars, and stained Yusuf's shirt with its blood. They claimed that this was the shirt Yusuf was wearing when the wolf devoured him, being stained with his blood. But, they forgot to tear the shirt, and this is why Allah's Prophet Ya`qub did not believe them. Rather, he told them what he felt about what they said to him, thus refusing their false claim,
بَلْ سَوَّلَتْ لَكُمْ أَنفُسُكُمْ أَمْرًا فَصَبْرٌ جَمِيلٌ
(Nay, but your ownselves have made up a tale. So (for me) patience is most fitting.) Ya`qub said, `I will firmly observe patience for this plot on which you agreed, until Allah relieves the distress with His aid and compassion,
وَاللَّهُ الْمُسْتَعَانُ عَلَى مَا تَصِفُونَ
(And it is Allah (alone) Whose help can be sought against that which you describe.), against the lies and unbelievable incident that you said had occurred.'
12.7-18
            Maududi - Sayyid Abul Ala Maududi - Tafhim al-Qur'an
This brother was Benjamin. He was the real younger brother of Prophet Joseph, and was his junior by many years. Their mother had died at the birth of Benjamin. That is why Prophet Jacob paid special attention to these two motherless children. Besides, Joseph was the only son, in whom he had discerned signs of righteousness and capabilities. Accordingly, when Prophet Joseph narrated his dream to him, he was all the more convinced of his future greatness, and was perturbed at the idea lest his brothers conspired against him out of envy, if they came to know of his dream, which was self-explanatory. For Prophet Jacob knew that his other ten sons were not of the right type, and this was proved by the subsequent events. Therefore, naturally he was not happy with them. It is, however, strange that the Bible gives a different reason for the envy his brothers bore against Prophet Joseph. They were filled with envy against him because "Joseph gave unto his father their evil report."
In order to grasp the full significance of the "grievance" the ten sons had against their father for "neglecting" them, we should keep in view the conditions of the clannish life. As there was no established state, each clan led its own independent life side by side with other clans. It is obvious that the power of the head of the clan depended entirely on the number of sons and grand-sons, and brothers and nephews he had to defend the life, honor and property of the family. Therefore, the one leading the clannish life naturally paid more attention to one's own grown up sons, etc., than to children and women of the family. As Prophet Jacob was leading clannish life, these sons of his expected a preferential treatment from him, but the Prophet thought otherwise. So they remarked, "Truly our father seems to have lost his balance of mind; otherwise he could not have neglected us, and loved our two younger brothers more than us, for we are strong young men and can stand him in good stead at the time of need while these youngsters are useless as they themselves stand in need of protection."
This sentence depicts the true psychology of those people who give themselves up to the lusts of their hearts, and, at the same time, do not want to break away completely from faith and religion. This is how a person of this type behaves. Whenever he is tempted to do a certain evil thing, he makes up his mind to do it first and puts off the demands of his faith for the time-being. And if his conscience pricks him, he tries to soothe it, saying, "Have a little patience. Let me first do this evil thing, which is an obstacle in my way. Then I will repent and become as good as Thou desirest to see me." As the brothers of Prophet Joseph belonged to this type, they soothed their pricking consciences, saying, "After doing away with Joseph, who is the chief obstacle in our way, we will again become righteous."
In this thing also the Qur'an differs from the Bible and the Talmud, according to which it was not the brothers, who requested their father to send Joseph with them but Prophet Jacob himself sent him with an errand to Shechem, where they were feeding their father's flocks. Obviously the version of the Qur'an is more realistic, for Prophet Jacob could never have thought of sending his beloved son with there, because he knew it full well that they were envious of him, and sending him there would have been sending Joseph deliberately into the jaws of death.
The Arabic words ("they do not understand" ) may very appropriately mean three things. First, "We were comforting Joseph, and his brothers were quite unaware of this that a Revelation was being sent to him." Second, "You will let them know of this evil act of theirs in such circumstances that they can never even imagine you to be there." Third, "Today they are committing an evil act, but they do not know its future consequences." There is no mention of this in the Bible and the Talmud that Allah sent a Revelation to comfort Prophet Joseph at that time of his affliction. On the contrary, the Talmud says that when he was thrown into the well, Prophet Joseph wept and cried aloud and implored his brothers for mercy, as if he was no better than any other lad of the desert, who would weep and cry if he were to be thrown into a well. But the picture the Qur'an depicts is that of a young man, who is destined to play the part of a great personality in history.
The literal meaning of "good patience" which implies a patience that enables one to endure all kinds of troubles and afflictions in a calm, self-possessed and unemotional manner, without complaining or crying or weeping, as is worthy of great minds.
Prophet Jacob's reaction to the news of Joseph's death, as depicted in the Qur'an, is also different from that given in the Bible and the Talmud. According to them he was upset by the sad news and behaved like an ordinary father. The Bible says, "And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins. And mourned for his son many days." (Gen. 37: 34). And the Talmud says that at the sad news Jacob gave himself up to the abandonment of grief, and lay with his face to the ground.... and refused to be comforted, and cried, 'Some wild beast has devoured Joseph and I shall never see him more'; and he mourned for Joseph for many years. (The Talmud, H. Polano, pp. 78, 79). When we contrast this picture with the one depicted in the Qur'an, we clearly see that the Qur'anic picture is that of a dignified and great personality. He is not upset in the least at hearing the sad news of his beloved son but at once gets to the bottom of the matter, and tells the envious brothers, "Your tale is false and fabricated." Then he shows "good patience" as a Prophet should and puts his trust in the help of God. "
