SOURCE: Ma'arif (en) (tafsir 168) on 17:104
COVERS: 17:101,17:102,17:103,17:104,17:105,17:106,17:107,17:108

Commentary The first verse (101): وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَىٰ تِسْعَ آيَاتٍ mentions the bestowal of nine clear signs on Sayyidna Musa (علیہ السلام) . The word: آیَہ ('ayah) carries the meaning of miracle or sign as well as that of the آیَت : ayat or verses of the Qur'an, that is, the divine injunctions. At this place, the probability of both meanings exists. Therefore, a number of commentators have taken the word 'ayat' to mean miracles - and the number nine does not make it necessary that they will not be more than nine - but, at this place, the figure 'nine' has been mentioned on the basis of some particular importance it has. Sayyidna ` Abdullah ibn ` Abbas ؓ has enumerated these miracles as follows: 1. The staff of Sayyidna Musa (علیہ السلام) which turned into a huge snake. 2. The hand that emitted light when placed under and taken out of the armpit. 3. The removal of stammering from his tongue. 4. The splitting of the water barrier in two sections to give safe passage to the Bani Isra'il to cross it. 5. The sending of the punishment through locusts in unusual circumstances. 6. The sending of the storm. 7. The clothes on their bodies were infested with countless lice they had no escape from. 8. The punishment of frogs was released on them when frogs would appear in everything they ate or drank. 9. The punishment of blood was sent that filled every utensil and mingled with whatever they ate or drank. And a Sahih Hadith tells us that the word 'ayat' used here means divine injunctions. This Hadith has been reported in Abu Dawud, an-Nasa'i, Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the authority of Sayyidna Safwan ibn al-` Aththal. He says that a Jew asked one of his friends to take him to 'that' prophet. The friend said, 'do not call him a prophet. If he finds out that we too call him a prophet, he will have four eyes on him (that is, he will have an opportunity to wallow in his pride and glee).' Then they came to the Holy Prophet ﷺ and asked him as to what were the nine clear signs given to Sayyidna Musa (علیہ السلام) . He said: 1. Do not ascribe any partners to Allah. 2. Do not steal. 3. Do not fornicate. 4. Do not unjustly take the life of the one whose killing has been forbidden by Allah. 5. Do not falsely impute anyone innocent with charges liable to the sentence of death or any other punishment. 6. Do not practice magic. 7. Do not devour interest. 8. Do not level a false accusation of fornication on a chaste woman. 9. Do not desert the battlefield in Jihad for fear of being killed. And he also said, '0 Jews, it has also been specially enjoined on you that you shall not contravene the particular injunctions of the observance of the day of Sabbath (Saturday) given to you.' Hearing what the Holy Prophet ﷺ said, they both kissed his hands and feet and declared, 'We bear witness that you are the prophet of Allah.' He said, 'What is it, then, that stops you from following me?' They said that Sayyidna Dawud (علیہ السلام) had prayed to his Lord for prophets to always keep appearing from among his progeny - 'and we are scared that the Jews will kill us if we started following you.' Since this explanation of the verse stands proved on the authority of Sahih Hadith, therefore, this is what many commentators have preferred to go by.