 Tafsirs for Qur'an 10.28 Yunus (Jonah) يونس Donate MENU Quran Tafsirs Hadiths Search Dictionaries Help About The Quran Tafsirs for 10.28 Yunus (Jonah) - يونس Chapter 1 - Al Fatiha (The opening) 2 - Al Baqara (The cow) 3 - Al Imran (The family of Imran) 4 - An Nisa (The women) 5 - Al Maida (The food) 6 - Al Anam (Cattle) 7 - Al Araf (The heights) 8 - Al Anfal (Spoils of war) 9 - Al Tawba (Immunity) 10 - Yunus (Jonah) 11 - Hud 12 - Yusuf (Joseph) 13 - Ar Rad (The thunder) 14 - Ibrahim (Abraham) 15 - Al Hijr (The rock) 16 - An Nahl (The bee) 17 - Bani Israil (The Israelites) 18 - Al Kahf (The cave) 19 - Maryamn (Mary) 20 - Ta-Ha 21 - Al Anbiya (The prophets) 22 - Al Hajj (The pilgrimage) 23 - Al Muminun (The believers) 24 - An Nur (The light) 25 - Al Furqan (The discrimination) 26 - Ash Shuara (The poets) 27 - An Naml (The ant) 28 - Al Qasas (The narrative) 29 - Al Ankabut (The spider) 30 - Ar Rum (The Romans) 31 - Luqman 32 - As Sajda (The adoration) 33 - Al Ahzab (The allies) 34 - Al Saba (The Saba) 35 - Al Fatir (The angels) 36 - Ya Sin 37 - As Saffat (Those who set up ranks) 38 - Saad 39 - Az Zumar (The troops) 40 - Al Ghafir (The forgiver) 41 - Fussilat (Explained in detail) 42 - Ash Shura (The council) 43 - Az Zukhruf (Gold) 44 - Ad Dukhan (Drought) 45 - Al Jathiya (Kneeling) 46 - Al Ahqaf (The dunes) 47 - Muhammad 48 - Al Fath (Victory) 49 - Al Hujraat (The apartments) 50 - Qaf 51 - Adh Dhariyat (The scatterers) 52 - At Tur (The mount) 53 - An Najm (The star) 54 - Al Qamar (The Moon) 55 - Ar Rahman (The beneficent) 56 - Al Waqia (The event) 57 - Al Hadid (Iron) 58 - Al Mujadila (The pleading woman) 59 - Al Hashr (Exile) 60 - Al Mumtahana (The examined woman) 61 - As Saff (The ranks) 62 - Al Jumua (The congregation) 63 - Al Munafiqun (The hypocrites) 64 - At Taghabun (Manifestation of losses) 65 - At Talaq (Divorce) 66 - At Tahrim (Prohibition) 67 - Al Mulk (The kingdom) 68 - Al Qalam (The pen) 69 - Al Haqqa (The reality) 70 - Al Maarij (Ascending stairways) 71 - Nuh (Noah) 72 - Al Jinn (The Jinn) 73 - Al Muzzammil (The enshrouded one) 74 - Al Muddaththir (The cloaked one) 75 - Al Qiyama (Resurrection) 76 - Al Insan (Man) 77 - Al Mursalat (The emissaries) 78 - An Naba (The tidings) 79 - An Naziat (Those who yearn) 80 - Abasa (He frowned) 81 - At Takwir (The folding up) 82 - Al Infitar (The cleaving) 83 - Al Mutaffifin (The cheats) 84 - Al Isnhiqaq (Splitting open) 85 - Al Buruj (The stars) 86 - At Tariq (The morning star) 87 - Al Ala (The most high) 88 - Al Ghashiya (The overwhelming) 89 - Al Fajr (The dawn) 90 - Al Balad (The city) 91 - Ash Shams (The Sun) 92 - Al Lail (The night) 93 - Ad Duhaa (The brightness of day) 94 - Al Inshirah (The expansion) 95 - At tin (The fig) 96 - Al Alaq (The clot) 97 - Al Qadr (The power) 98 - Al Bayyina (Clear proof) 99 - Al Zalzala (The shaking) 100 - Al Adiyat (The assaulters) 101 - Al Qaria (The calamity) 102 - At Takathur (Abundance of wealth) 103 - Al Asr (The time) 104 - Al Humaza (The slanderer) 105 - Al Fil (The elephant) 106 - Quraish (The Quraish) 107 - Al Maun (Almsgiving) 108 - Al Kauthar (Abundance) 109 - Al Kafirun (The disbelievers) 110 - An Nasr (Divine support) 111 - Al Lahab (The flame) 112 - Al Ikhlas (The unity) 113 - Al Falaq (Dawn) 114 - An Nas (Mankind) Verse « Prev Go Next » 10.28 Abbas - Tanwîr al-Miqbâs min Tafsîr Ibn ‘Abbâs (On the day when We gather them) the disbelievers and their gods (all together, then We say unto those who ascribed partners) to Allah: idols: (Stand back) stop, (ye and your (pretended) partners (of Allah)) you and your idols! (And We separate them, the one from the other) We separated them from their idols; and the disbelievers said: "these have commanded us to worship them instead of worshipping You"; (and their (pretended) partners say) and their idols respond: (It was not us ye worshipped) we did not command you to worship us. 10.28 Jalal - Al-Jalalayn And mention the day on which We shall gather them that is creation all together then We shall say to those who associated others with God ‘In your place! makānakum is in the accusative because ilzamū ‘adhere to’ is implied sc. ilzamū makānakum. You antum this emphasises the second person plural subject concealed in the implied verb ilzamū and allows for the supplement that follows and your associates!’ that is the idols. Then We shall make a separation We shall distinguish between them and the believers as is stated in the verse wa’mtāzū’l-yawma ayyuhā’l-mujrimūn ‘Now be separate you sinners upon this day!’ Q. 3659; and their associates will say to them ‘It was not us that you were worshipping mā of mā-kuntum ‘you were not …’ is for negation; the direct object iyyānā ‘us’ precedes the verb in order to accord with the end-rhyme of the Qur’ānic verse; 10.28 Kashani - Kashani And the day on which We shall gather them all together, at the greatest gathering, the source of the non-delimited union of existence; then We shall say to those who associated others [with God], from among them, that is, the veiled ones who have halted with the other in love and obedience: 'In your place!, that is, hold your place. You and your associates!': the meaning [of this] is that they are made to halt with that with which they had halted [in their idolatry] at the halting place in addition to the severing of the union (waṣl) and the means (asbāb) which are the very causes of their love and their worship, with the worshipped being dissociating from the worshipper because of the absence of corporeal instruments and natural individual desires which necessitated that union. That is the meaning of His words: Then We shall make a separation between them, in other words, even though they are together at the halting place, We shall make a separation between them in terms of direction, in that the level of the worshipped ends up being higher while the level of the worshipper ends up lower in addition to the discrepancy between their two states, if the worshipped being was a noble being, such as the angels, Jesus or Ezra and their like from among those who have a preceding reward from God, as He says: Indeed those to whom [the promise of] the fairest reward went beforehand from Us, those, they will be kept away from it [Q. 21:101]; and their associates will say: 'It was not us that you were worshipping, rather you were worshipping Satan by your obedience of him and what you fancifully invented by your estimations in the way of corrupt falsehoods and fallacious wishes. 10.28-30 Kathir - Ibn Al Kathir The gods of the Idolators will claim Innocence from them on the Day of Resurrection Allah said: وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُهُمْ (And the Day whereon We shall gather them) Allah will gather together all the creatures of earth, human and Jinn, righteous and rebellious. He said in another Ayah: وَحَشَرْنَـهُمْ فَلَمْ نُغَادِرْ مِنْهُمْ أَحَداً (and We shall gather them all together so as to leave not one of them behind.)18:47 ثُمَّ نَقُولُ لِلَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُواْ مَكَانَكُمْ أَنتُمْ وَشُرَكَآؤُكُمْ (then We shall say to those who did associate partners: "Stop at your place! You and your partners.'') He then will command the idolators to stay where they are and not to move from their destined places so they would be separated from the place of the believers. Similarly, Allah said: وَامْتَازُواْ الْيَوْمَ أَيُّهَا الْمُجْرِمُونَ ((It will be said): "And O you the criminals! Get you apart this Day (from the believers).)(36:59) Allah also said: وَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ يَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَفَرَّقُونَ (And on the Day when the Hour will be established - that Day shall (all men) be separated (the believers will be separated from the disbelievers). )30:14 In the same Surah, Ar-Rum, Allah said: يَوْمَئِذٍ يَصَّدَّعُونَ (On that Day men shall be divided.) 30:43 means, they shall be divided in two. This is what will take place when Allah Almighty will come for Final Judgement. The believers intercede to Allah so the Final Judgement may come and they get rid of that state. The Prophet said, «نَحْنُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عَلَى كُومٍ فَوْقَ النَّاس» (On the Day of Resurrection, we will be in a visible place above the other people.) Allah tells us here what He is going to command the idolators and their idols to do on the Day of Resurrection مَكَانَكُمْ أَنتُمْ وَشُرَكَآؤُكُمْ فَزَيَّلْنَا بَيْنَهُمْ ("Stop at your place! You and your partners.'' Then We shall separate them,) and that they would deny their worship and claim their innocence from them. Similarly, Allah said: ` كَلاَّ سَيَكْفُرُونَ بِعِبَـدَتِهِمْ (Nay, but they will deny their worship of them.)19:82, إِذْ تَبَرَّأَ الَّذِينَ اتُّبِعُواْ مِنَ الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُواْ (When those who were followed declare themselves innocent of those who followed (them).)2:166, and; وَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّن يَدْعُو مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَن لاَّ يَسْتَجِيبُ لَهُ إِلَى يَوْمِ الْقِيَـمَةِ وَهُمْ عَن دُعَآئِهِمْ غَـفِلُونَ وَإِذَا حُشِرَ النَّاسُ كَانُواْ لَهُمْ أَعْدَآءً (And who is more astray than one who calls on (invokes) besides Allah, such as will not answer him till the Day of Resurrection, and who are (even) unaware of their calls (invocations) to them And when mankind are gathered (on the Day of Resurrection), they (false deities) will become their enemies)46:5-6. This refers to the partners responding to those who worshipped them, Then Allah said: فَكَفَى بِاللَّهِ شَهِيدًا بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَكُمْ (So sufficient is Allah as a witness between us and you.) They say that we did not know or think that you were worshipping us. Allah is a Witness between us and you that we never called upon you to worship us. We never ordered you to worship us; neither did we accept your worship of us. Allah said: هُنَالِكَ تَبْلُواْ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّآ أَسْلَفَتْ (There! Every person will know (exactly) what he had earned before) This will be the state of accounting on the Day of Resurrection. Every soul shall know all that it had sent forth, both good and evil. Similarly, Allah said: يَوْمَ تُبْلَى السَّرَآئِرُ (The Day when all the secrets will be examined.)86:9, يُنَبَّأُ الإِنسَـنُ يَوْمَئِذِ بِمَا قَدَّمَ وَأَخَّرَ (On that Day man will be informed of what he sent forward (of deeds), and what he left behind.)75:13, and وَكُلَّ إِنْسَـنٍ أَلْزَمْنَـهُ طَـئِرَهُ فِى عُنُقِهِ وَنُخْرِجُ لَهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَـمَةِ كِتَابًا يَلْقَـهُ مَنْشُوراً - اقْرَأْ كَتَـبَكَ كَفَى بِنَفْسِكَ الْيَوْمَ عَلَيْكَ حَسِيبًا (...and on the Day of Resurrection, We shall bring out for him a book which he will find wide open. (It will be said to him): "Read your book. You yourself are sufficient as a reckoner against you this Day.'') 17:13-14 Then Allah said, وَرُدُّواْ إِلَى اللَّهِ مَوْلَـهُمُ الْحَقِّ (and they will be brought back to Allah, their rightful Mawla.) All affairs and matters will be brought back to Allah, the Judge, the All-Just. He will judge everyone, and then admit the people of Paradise in Paradise and the people of Hell to Hell. وَضَلَّ عَنْهُم (and will vanish from them) meaning what the idolators worshipped, مَّا كَانُواْ يَفْتَرُونَ (what they invented) what they worshipped besides Allah that they invented. 10.21-28 Maududi - Sayyid Abul Ala Maududi - Tafhim al-Qur'an They practiced deceptions regarding "the Sign of the famine" that had been inflicted on them (vv. 11, 12). This verse alludes to the same, as if to say, "How dart you demand a Sign again, whereas recently the Sign of the famine has been shown to you ? At that time you invoked the help of your deities but in vain, though you had set them up as intercessors with Allah and believed that offerings to their shrines would prove very effective in removing the famine. But you yourselves learned by first hand experience that those so-called gods possessed no power at all. Therefore when you were convinced that all power belongs to Allah alone, you turned to Him and began to invoke His help. This experience ought to have convinced you of the Truth of the Message of Muhammad (Allah's peace be upon him) for this was the very fundamental thing which he was teaching. Instead of learning a lesson from this Sign, you began to practice deceptions to explain it away, as soon as the famine was over and there had come the blessed rainfall. You invented many explanations (deceptions) concerning the causes of the famine and its subsequent end in order to 'escape' from the doctrine of Tauhid and stick to your shirk. The verse is meant to declare that no Sign would convince such people as those who had not benefited from the great Sign of the famine. Therefore there was no use of showing any sign to them. "Allah is more swift in His plans than you......" means this: "If you practice deceptions in order to explain away the Sign of the famine so that you might find excuses to evade the implications of its acceptance, in order to continue your rebellious attitudes, Allah is more swift in carrying out His plans to out-do your deceptive methods. He will leave you free to move in your wrong ways: He will even bestow upon you the worldly prosperity, which will so delude you that you will forget that you were being closely watched and will, therefore, commit evil deeds with apparent immunity and enjoy yourselves to your heart's content. But His angels will go on keeping a full and complete record of your deeds, which will be presented for your prosecution after your death." The fact that even the most obdurate mushriks and the most hardened atheists who forget Allah when things go well with them, begin to invoke Allah's help when they are pressed hard from all sides and despair of help froth any other quarter, is a clear evidence that there is the All-Powerful Allah Who is controlling each and every thing in the universe. (Please refer to E.N. 29, Al An 'am. ) aThe parable is meant to warn those who are utterly neglectful of the Life-after-death because of their apparent "success" in this worldly life. They have been likened to the owners of the land who were happy to presume that the crop was ripe and luxuriant and it was within their power to reap it and enjoy the produce of their harvest. They were so sure of this that they began to enjoy the fore-taste of the ripened crops, unaware of the Decree of Allah which destroyed their crops and all their great expectations also. Like-wise those who neglect to make preparations for the life-after-death will find to their sorrow that all they did to earn for the enjoyments of this world was, in relation to the Next World, like the ripe crop that was destroyed all of a sudden. That is, "Allah invites to the Way that leads to the Abode of Peace in the Hereafter." "The Abode of Peace" here means Paradise, where there will be no fear whatsoever of any loss, calamity, sorrow, pain and trouble. That is, "Allah by His grace will give to those who did good deeds more than their due reward. " That is, "In contrast to the additional rewards to the good people, those who earned evil deeds, shall be punished only in proportion to their crimes." (For further explanation see E.N. 109a of XXVII). It shall be that kind of gloom that overspreads the faces of the criminals when they are caught, and they despair all hope of escape. Some commentators are of the opinion that the original words of the text mean this: "We will cut off every kind of connection and relation between them so that they are not able to show any concern for one another. " But these meanings are opposed to the Arabic usage, according to which they mean: "We will distinguish them from one another" or "We will cause a distinction among them." That is why these have been translated into English like this: "We will remove the state of strangeness from among them. " That is, the mushriks and their deities shall stand in front of each other and recognize their mutual and respective positions. The mushriks shall come to know the whole truth about those whom they worshiped and their deities will learn everything about their worshipers. 