 Tafsirs for Qur'an 10.32 Yunus (Jonah) يونس Donate MENU Quran Tafsirs Hadiths Search Dictionaries Help About The Quran Tafsirs for 10.32 Yunus (Jonah) - يونس Chapter 1 - Al Fatiha (The opening) 2 - Al Baqara (The cow) 3 - Al Imran (The family of Imran) 4 - An Nisa (The women) 5 - Al Maida (The food) 6 - Al Anam (Cattle) 7 - Al Araf (The heights) 8 - Al Anfal (Spoils of war) 9 - Al Tawba (Immunity) 10 - Yunus (Jonah) 11 - Hud 12 - Yusuf (Joseph) 13 - Ar Rad (The thunder) 14 - Ibrahim (Abraham) 15 - Al Hijr (The rock) 16 - An Nahl (The bee) 17 - Bani Israil (The Israelites) 18 - Al Kahf (The cave) 19 - Maryamn (Mary) 20 - Ta-Ha 21 - Al Anbiya (The prophets) 22 - Al Hajj (The pilgrimage) 23 - Al Muminun (The believers) 24 - An Nur (The light) 25 - Al Furqan (The discrimination) 26 - Ash Shuara (The poets) 27 - An Naml (The ant) 28 - Al Qasas (The narrative) 29 - Al Ankabut (The spider) 30 - Ar Rum (The Romans) 31 - Luqman 32 - As Sajda (The adoration) 33 - Al Ahzab (The allies) 34 - Al Saba (The Saba) 35 - Al Fatir (The angels) 36 - Ya Sin 37 - As Saffat (Those who set up ranks) 38 - Saad 39 - Az Zumar (The troops) 40 - Al Ghafir (The forgiver) 41 - Fussilat (Explained in detail) 42 - Ash Shura (The council) 43 - Az Zukhruf (Gold) 44 - Ad Dukhan (Drought) 45 - Al Jathiya (Kneeling) 46 - Al Ahqaf (The dunes) 47 - Muhammad 48 - Al Fath (Victory) 49 - Al Hujraat (The apartments) 50 - Qaf 51 - Adh Dhariyat (The scatterers) 52 - At Tur (The mount) 53 - An Najm (The star) 54 - Al Qamar (The Moon) 55 - Ar Rahman (The beneficent) 56 - Al Waqia (The event) 57 - Al Hadid (Iron) 58 - Al Mujadila (The pleading woman) 59 - Al Hashr (Exile) 60 - Al Mumtahana (The examined woman) 61 - As Saff (The ranks) 62 - Al Jumua (The congregation) 63 - Al Munafiqun (The hypocrites) 64 - At Taghabun (Manifestation of losses) 65 - At Talaq (Divorce) 66 - At Tahrim (Prohibition) 67 - Al Mulk (The kingdom) 68 - Al Qalam (The pen) 69 - Al Haqqa (The reality) 70 - Al Maarij (Ascending stairways) 71 - Nuh (Noah) 72 - Al Jinn (The Jinn) 73 - Al Muzzammil (The enshrouded one) 74 - Al Muddaththir (The cloaked one) 75 - Al Qiyama (Resurrection) 76 - Al Insan (Man) 77 - Al Mursalat (The emissaries) 78 - An Naba (The tidings) 79 - An Naziat (Those who yearn) 80 - Abasa (He frowned) 81 - At Takwir (The folding up) 82 - Al Infitar (The cleaving) 83 - Al Mutaffifin (The cheats) 84 - Al Isnhiqaq (Splitting open) 85 - Al Buruj (The stars) 86 - At Tariq (The morning star) 87 - Al Ala (The most high) 88 - Al Ghashiya (The overwhelming) 89 - Al Fajr (The dawn) 90 - Al Balad (The city) 91 - Ash Shams (The Sun) 92 - Al Lail (The night) 93 - Ad Duhaa (The brightness of day) 94 - Al Inshirah (The expansion) 95 - At tin (The fig) 96 - Al Alaq (The clot) 97 - Al Qadr (The power) 98 - Al Bayyina (Clear proof) 99 - Al Zalzala (The shaking) 100 - Al Adiyat (The assaulters) 101 - Al Qaria (The calamity) 102 - At Takathur (Abundance of wealth) 103 - Al Asr (The time) 104 - Al Humaza (The slanderer) 105 - Al Fil (The elephant) 106 - Quraish (The Quraish) 107 - Al Maun (Almsgiving) 108 - Al Kauthar (Abundance) 109 - Al Kafirun (The disbelievers) 110 - An Nasr (Divine support) 111 - Al Lahab (The flame) 112 - Al Ikhlas (The unity) 113 - Al Falaq (Dawn) 114 - An Nas (Mankind) Verse « Prev Go Next » 10.32 Abbas - Tanwîr al-Miqbâs min Tafsîr Ibn ‘Abbâs (Such then is Allah, your rightful Lord) the one who is able to do so is your Lord, Who is the Truth and whose worship is the Truth. (After the Truth what is there saving error) after worship of Allah what is your worship if not worship of the devil? (How then are ye turned away) from whence do you invent lies about Allah! 10.32 Jalal - Al-Jalalayn That Doer of all these things then is God your true established Lord so what is there after truth except error? the interrogative is meant as an affirmative in other words there is nothing after it truth other than that error; thus he who mistakes the truth which is the worship of God has fallen into error. How then are you turned away from faith despite the proofs having been established? 10.31-33 Kathir - Ibn Al Kathir The Idolators recognize Allah's Tawhid in Lordship and the Evidence is established against Them through this Recognition Allah argues that the idolators' recognition of Allah's Oneness in Lordship is an evidence against them, for which they should admit and recognize the Oneness in divinity and worship. So Allah said: قُلْ مَن يَرْزُقُكُم مِّنَ السَّمَآءِ وَالاٌّرْضِ (Say: "Who provides for you from the sky and the earth'') meaning, who is He Who sends down water from the sky and splits the earth with His power and will and allows things to grow from it, أَءِلـهٌ مَّعَ اللهِ (Is there a god, besides Allah) 27:62 Who provides; فَأَنبَتْنَا فِيهَا حَبّاً - وَعِنَباً وَقَضْباً - وَزَيْتُوناً وَنَخْلاً - وَحَدَآئِقَ غُلْباً - وَفَـكِهَةً وَأَبّاً (Grains. And grapes and clover plants. And olives and date palms. And gardens dense with many trees. And fruits and herbage.)''80:27-31 فَسَيَقُولُونَ اللَّهُ (They will say: "Allah.'') أَمَّنْ هَـذَا الَّذِى يَرْزُقُكُمْ إِنْ أَمْسَكَ رِزْقَهُ ("Who is he that can provide for you if He should withhold His provision) 67:21 Allah's statement, أَمَّن يَمْلِكُ السَّمْعَ والاٌّبْصَـرَ (Or who owns hearing and sight) means that Allah is the One who granted you the power of sight and hearing. If He willed otherwise, He would remove these gifts and deprive you of them. Similarly, Allah said: قُلْ هُوَ الَّذِى أَنشَأَكُمْ وَجَعَلَ لَكُمُ السَّمْعَ وَالاٌّبْصَـرَ (Say it is He Who has created you, and endowed you with hearing and seeing.) 67:23 Allah also said: قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَخَذَ اللَّهُ سَمْعَكُمْ وَأَبْصَـرَكُمْ (Say: "Tell me, if Allah took away your hearing and your sight.)6:46 Then Allah said: وَمَن يُخْرِجُ الْحَىَّ مِنَ الْمَيِّتِ وَيُخْرِجُ الْمَيِّتَ مِنَ الْحَىِّ (And who brings out the living from the dead and brings out the dead from the living) by His great power and grace. وَمَن يُدَبِّرُ الاٌّمْرَ (And who disposes of the affairs) In Whose Hand is the dominion of everything Who protects all, while against Whom there is no protector Who is the One who judges with none reversing His judgement Who is the One that is not questioned about what He does while they will be questioned يَسْأَلُهُ مَن فِى السَّمَـوَتِ وَالاٌّرْضِ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ هُوَ فِى شَأْنٍ (Whosoever is in the heavens and on earth begs of Him. Every day He is (engaged) in some affair!)55:29 The upper and lower kingdoms and what is in them both, including the angels, humans, and Jinn are in desperate need of Him. They are His servants and are under His control. فَسَيَقُولُونَ اللَّهُ (They will say: "Allah.'') they say this knowingly and they admit it. فَقُلْ أَفَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ (Say: `Will you not then be afraid (of Allah's punishment)'') meaning, don't you fear Him when you worship others because of your ignorance and false opinions Allah then said: فَذَلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمُ الْحَقُّ (Such is Allah, your Lord in truth.) This Lord that you admitted is the One Who does all this, is your Lord and the True Deity that deserves to be worshipped alone. فَمَاذَا بَعْدَ الْحَقِّ إِلاَّ الضَّلاَلُ (So after the truth, what else can there be, save error) any one worshipped other than Him is false, for there is no God but Allah, He Has no partners. فَأَنَّى تُصْرَفُونَ (How then are you turned away) How then can you turn away from His worship to worship others while you know that He is the Lord that has created everything, the One who controls and governs everything Allah then said: كَذَلِكَ حَقَّتْ كَلِمَةُ رَبِّكَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ فَسَقُواْ (Thus is the Word of your Lord justified against those who rebel,) These idolators disbelieved and continued to practice their Shirk, and worship others beside Allah. But they knew that He is the Creator, the Sustainer and the only One of authority and control in this universe, the One Who sent His Messengers to single Him out for all worship. As they disbelieved and were persistent in their Shirk, Allah's Word proved true and was justified that they would be miserable inhabitants of the Fire. Allah said: قَالُواْ بَلَى وَلَـكِنْ حَقَّتْ كَلِمَةُ الْعَذَابِ عَلَى الْكَـفِرِينَ (They will say: "Yes,'' but the Word of torment has been justified against the disbelievers!) 39:71 10.29-33 Maududi - Sayyid Abul Ala Maududi - Tafhim al-Qur'an That is, "Their deities-the angels, the jinns, the spirits, the forefathers, the prophets, the saints, the martyrs and all others-whom they had set up as partners with God and rendered those rights to them which belonged to God alone, will dissociate themselves from their worshipers and declare, "We did not know at all that you worshiped us, for no reverence, no respect, no honor, no admiration, no regard, no adoration, no homage, that you paid to us; no prayer, no supplication, no request, no offering, no gift, you presented to us; and no praise, no prostration, no bowing down, no remembrance, no religious service, or ceremony or ritual you made in our name ever reached us." That is, "As you yourselves admit that Allah alone is your real Providence, Owner and Master, He alone is your true Lord, and, therefore, entitled to your servitude and worship. How have you, then, made others as partners with Him?" It should be kept in mind that these questions have been posed to the common people: therefore they are not being asked, "Whither are you turning away?" but "Whither are you being turned away?" The passive voice clearly shows that there must be some person (or persons) who was turning away the people from the right direction to the wrong one. That is Why this appeal is being made to the people: "Why are you blindly following those who are misguiding you? Why don't you use your own commonsense? When you yourselves admit the Truth about Allah, why don't you consider the fact that you are being turned away from Him?" This question has been posed at many places in the Qur'an to bring home the Truth to the common people, but at every place the passive voice has been employed in order to keep back the names of the misguiding ones so that their followers should consider the matter coolly and objectively. This also contains a valuable piece of advice for those engaged in propagation work. By avoiding the names of the misguiding ones, the Qur'an has taken away a very strong weapon from the hands of those, who could otherwise incite the followers that their revered leaders were being made the target of ridicule and criticism. That is, "This Word of your Lord has come true that those who have made up their minds that they would not believe in any case would never believe because of their obduracy, even if the Truth were to be presented before them with very plain and clear arguments." 