 Tafsirs for Qur'an 10.39 Yunus (Jonah) يونس Donate MENU Quran Tafsirs Hadiths Search Dictionaries Help About The Quran Tafsirs for 10.39 Yunus (Jonah) - يونس Chapter 1 - Al Fatiha (The opening) 2 - Al Baqara (The cow) 3 - Al Imran (The family of Imran) 4 - An Nisa (The women) 5 - Al Maida (The food) 6 - Al Anam (Cattle) 7 - Al Araf (The heights) 8 - Al Anfal (Spoils of war) 9 - Al Tawba (Immunity) 10 - Yunus (Jonah) 11 - Hud 12 - Yusuf (Joseph) 13 - Ar Rad (The thunder) 14 - Ibrahim (Abraham) 15 - Al Hijr (The rock) 16 - An Nahl (The bee) 17 - Bani Israil (The Israelites) 18 - Al Kahf (The cave) 19 - Maryamn (Mary) 20 - Ta-Ha 21 - Al Anbiya (The prophets) 22 - Al Hajj (The pilgrimage) 23 - Al Muminun (The believers) 24 - An Nur (The light) 25 - Al Furqan (The discrimination) 26 - Ash Shuara (The poets) 27 - An Naml (The ant) 28 - Al Qasas (The narrative) 29 - Al Ankabut (The spider) 30 - Ar Rum (The Romans) 31 - Luqman 32 - As Sajda (The adoration) 33 - Al Ahzab (The allies) 34 - Al Saba (The Saba) 35 - Al Fatir (The angels) 36 - Ya Sin 37 - As Saffat (Those who set up ranks) 38 - Saad 39 - Az Zumar (The troops) 40 - Al Ghafir (The forgiver) 41 - Fussilat (Explained in detail) 42 - Ash Shura (The council) 43 - Az Zukhruf (Gold) 44 - Ad Dukhan (Drought) 45 - Al Jathiya (Kneeling) 46 - Al Ahqaf (The dunes) 47 - Muhammad 48 - Al Fath (Victory) 49 - Al Hujraat (The apartments) 50 - Qaf 51 - Adh Dhariyat (The scatterers) 52 - At Tur (The mount) 53 - An Najm (The star) 54 - Al Qamar (The Moon) 55 - Ar Rahman (The beneficent) 56 - Al Waqia (The event) 57 - Al Hadid (Iron) 58 - Al Mujadila (The pleading woman) 59 - Al Hashr (Exile) 60 - Al Mumtahana (The examined woman) 61 - As Saff (The ranks) 62 - Al Jumua (The congregation) 63 - Al Munafiqun (The hypocrites) 64 - At Taghabun (Manifestation of losses) 65 - At Talaq (Divorce) 66 - At Tahrim (Prohibition) 67 - Al Mulk (The kingdom) 68 - Al Qalam (The pen) 69 - Al Haqqa (The reality) 70 - Al Maarij (Ascending stairways) 71 - Nuh (Noah) 72 - Al Jinn (The Jinn) 73 - Al Muzzammil (The enshrouded one) 74 - Al Muddaththir (The cloaked one) 75 - Al Qiyama (Resurrection) 76 - Al Insan (Man) 77 - Al Mursalat (The emissaries) 78 - An Naba (The tidings) 79 - An Naziat (Those who yearn) 80 - Abasa (He frowned) 81 - At Takwir (The folding up) 82 - Al Infitar (The cleaving) 83 - Al Mutaffifin (The cheats) 84 - Al Isnhiqaq (Splitting open) 85 - Al Buruj (The stars) 86 - At Tariq (The morning star) 87 - Al Ala (The most high) 88 - Al Ghashiya (The overwhelming) 89 - Al Fajr (The dawn) 90 - Al Balad (The city) 91 - Ash Shams (The Sun) 92 - Al Lail (The night) 93 - Ad Duhaa (The brightness of day) 94 - Al Inshirah (The expansion) 95 - At tin (The fig) 96 - Al Alaq (The clot) 97 - Al Qadr (The power) 98 - Al Bayyina (Clear proof) 99 - Al Zalzala (The shaking) 100 - Al Adiyat (The assaulters) 101 - Al Qaria (The calamity) 102 - At Takathur (Abundance of wealth) 103 - Al Asr (The time) 104 - Al Humaza (The slanderer) 105 - Al Fil (The elephant) 106 - Quraish (The Quraish) 107 - Al Maun (Almsgiving) 108 - Al Kauthar (Abundance) 109 - Al Kafirun (The disbelievers) 110 - An Nasr (Divine support) 111 - Al Lahab (The flame) 112 - Al Ikhlas (The unity) 113 - Al Falaq (Dawn) 114 - An Nas (Mankind) Verse « Prev Go Next » 10.39 Abbas - Tanwîr al-Miqbâs min Tafsîr Ibn ‘Abbâs (Nay, but they denied that, the knowledge whereof they could not compass) they denied that which their knowledge could not embrace, (and whereof the interpretation) the consequence of what the Qur'an promised them (hath not yet come unto them. Even so) just as your people deny the Scriptures and messengers (did those before them deny) the Scriptures and messengers. (Then see) O Muhammad (what was the consequence for the wrong-doers!) what was the end result of the idolaters who denied the Scriptures and messengers and never worshipped Allah. It is also said that this was a consolation from Allah, glorified and Mighty is He, to His Prophet (pbuh) so that he endures their harm. 10.39 Jalal - Al-Jalalayn God exalted be He says Nay but they denied that the knowledge whereof they did not comprehend that is they denied the Qur’ān and did not reflected upon it; and whereof the interpretation the consequence of the threats made therein has not yet come to them. So in the same manner of denial those who were before them denied their messengers. Behold then what was the consequence for the evildoers! for denying the messengers in other words behold how their affair was concluded by their being destroyed. In a similar manner We shall destroy these people. 10.39 Kashani - Kashani Nay, but they denied that, the knowledge whereof they did not comprehend: in other words, since they did not know the modality of its confirmation according to God's knowledge and its revelation to our master Muḥammad, blessings and peace be upon him, and [since] their knowledge fell short of that, they denied it; and whereof the interpretation has not yet come to them, that is, [before there has come to them] the manifestation of what it [the QurÌān] alludes to of promised eventualities and similes, the affair and knowledge of which constitutes its unfolding (taÌwīl) whereat they would not be able to deny [it], because once its realities are manifested no one will be able to deny it. The like of that tremendous denial, did those who were before them deny. Behold then what was, their sequel when they did evil by [their] denial. 10.37-40 Kathir - Ibn Al Kathir The Qur'an is the True, Inimitable Word of Allah and It is a Miracle The Qur'an has a miraculous nature that cannot be imitated. No one can produce anything similar to the Qur'an, nor ten Surahs or even one Surah like it. The eloquence, clarity, precision and grace of the Qur'an cannot be but from Allah. The great and abundant principles and meanings within the Qur'an -- which are of great benefit in this world and for the Hereafter -- cannot be but from Allah. There is nothing like His High Self and Attributes or like His sayings and actions. Therefore His Words are not like the words of His creatures. This is why Allah said: وَمَا كَانَ هَـذَا الْقُرْءَانُ أَن يُفْتَرَى مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ (And this Qur'an is not such as could ever be produced by other than Allah) meaning, a book like this cannot be but from Allah. This is not similar to the speech uttered by humans. وَلَـكِن تَصْدِيقَ الَّذِى بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ (but it is a confirmation of (the revelation) which was before it,) Such as previous revelations and Books. The Qur'an confirms these books and is a witness to them. It shows the changes, perversions and corruption that have taken place within these Books. Then Allah said, وَتَفْصِيلَ الْكِتَابِ لاَ رَيْبَ فِيهِ مِن رَّبِّ الْعَـلَمِينَ (and a full explanation of the Book -- wherein there is no doubt -- from the Lord of all that exists.) That is, fully and truly explaining and detailing the rules and the lawful and the unlawful. With this complete and more than sufficient explanation, the Qur'an leaves no doubt that it is from Allah, the Lord of all that exists. Allah says, أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَاهُ قُلْ فَأْتُواْ بِسُورَةٍ مِّثْلِهِ وَادْعُواْ مَنِ اسْتَطَعْتُمْ مِّن دُونِ اللَّهِ إِن كُنتُمْ صَـدِقِينَ (Or do they say: "He has forged it'' Say: "Bring then a Surah like unto it, and call upon whomsoever you can besides Allah, if you are truthful!'') If you argue, claim and doubt whether this is from Allah then you uttered a lie and blasphemy, and you say it is from Muhammad -- Muhammad, however is a man like you, and since he came as you claim with this Qur'an -- then you produce a Surah like one of its Surahs. Produce something of the same nature and seek help and support with all the power you have from humans and Jinns. This is the third stage, Allah challenged them and called them to produce a counterpart of the Qur'an if they were truthful in their claim that it was simply from Muhammad. Allah even suggested that they seek help from anyone they chose. But He told them that they would not be able to do it. They would have no way of doing so. Allah said: قُل لَّئِنِ اجْتَمَعَتِ الإِنسُ وَالْجِنُّ عَلَى أَن يَأْتُواْ بِمِثْلِ هَـذَا الْقُرْءَانِ لاَ يَأْتُونَ بِمِثْلِهِ وَلَوْ كَانَ بَعْضُهُمْ لِبَعْضٍ ظَهِيرًا (Say: "If the mankind and the Jinn were together to produce the like of this Qur'an, they could not produce the like thereof, even if they helped one another.'') 17:88 Then He reduced the number for them to ten Surahs similar to it, in the beginning of Surah Hud, Allah said: أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَاهُ قُلْ فَأْتُواْ بِعَشْرِ سُوَرٍ مِّثْلِهِ مُفْتَرَيَاتٍ وَادْعُواْ مَنِ اسْتَطَعْتُمْ مِّن دُونِ اللَّهِ إِن كُنتُمْ صَـدِقِينَ (Or they say, "He forged it.'' Say: "Bring you then ten forged Surah like unto it, and call whomsoever you can, other than Allah, if you speak the truth!'')11:13 In this Surah He went even further to challenge them to produce only one Surah like unto the Qur'an. So He said: أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَاهُ قُلْ فَأْتُواْ بِسُورَةٍ مِّثْلِهِ وَادْعُواْ مَنِ اسْتَطَعْتُمْ مِّن دُونِ اللَّهِ إِن كُنتُمْ صَـدِقِينَ (Or do they say: "He has forged it'' Say: "Bring then a Surah like unto it, and call upon whomsoever you can besides Allah, if you are truthful!'') 10:38 He also challenged them in Surat Al-Baqarah, a Madinite Surah, to produce one Surah similar to it. He stated in that Surah that they would never be capable of doing so, saying: فَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلُواْ وَلَن تَفْعَلُواْ فَاتَّقُواْ النَّارَ (But if you do it not, and you can never do it, then fear the Fire (Hell).)2:24 It should be noted here that eloquence was a part of the nature and character of the Arabs. Arabic poetry including Al-Mu`allaqat -- the oldest complete collection of the most eloquent ancient Arabic poems -- was considered to be the best in the literary arts. However Allah sent down to them something whose style none were familiar with, and no one is equal in stature to imitate. So those who believed among them, believed because of what they knew and felt in the Book, including its beauty, elegance, benefit, and fluency. They became the most knowledgeable of the Qur'an and its best in adhering to it. The same thing happened to the magicians during Fir`awn's time. They were knowledgeable of the arts of sorcery, however, when Musa performed his miracles, they knew that it must have come through someone that was supported and guided by Allah. They knew that no human could perform such acts without the permission of Allah. Similarly, `Isa was sent at the time of scholarly medicine and during the advancement in the treatment of patients. He healed the blind, lepers and raised the dead to life by Allah's leave. What `Isa was able to do was such that no form of treatment or medicine could reproduce. As a result, those who believed in him knew that he was Allah's servant and His Messenger. Similarly, in the Sahih, Allah's Messenger said, «مَا مِنْ نَبِيَ مِنَ الْأَنْبِيَاءِ إِلَّا وَقَدْ أُوتِيَ مِنَ الْآيَاتِ مَا آمَنَ عَلَى مِثْلِهِ الْبَشَرُ، وَإِنَّمَا كَانَ الَّذِي أُوتِيتُهُ وَحْيًا أَوْحَاهُ اللهُ إِلَيَّ فَأَرْجُو أَنْ أَكُونَ أَكْثَرَهُمْ تَابِعًا» (There was never a Prophet but he was given signs by which the people would recognize him, and that which I was given is revelation that Allah revealed, so I hope that I will have the most followers among them.) Allah then said: بَلْ كَذَّبُواْ بِمَا لَمْ يُحِيطُواْ بِعِلْمِهِ وَلَمَّا يَأْتِهِمْ تَأْوِيلُهُ (Nay, they have belied the knowledge whereof they could not comprehend and what has not yet been fulfilled. ) They did not believe in the Qur'an and they have not yet grasped it or comprehended it. وَلَمَّا يَأْتِهِمْ تَأْوِيلُهُ (And what has not yet been fulfilled.) They have not attained the guidance and the true religion. So they belied it out of ignorance and foolishness. كَذَلِكَ كَذَّبَ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ (Those before them did belie.) meaning, the past nations, فَانظُرْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَـقِبَةُ الظَّـلِمِينَ (Then see what was the end of the wrongdoers!) Look at how we Destroyed them because they denied Our Messengers in their wickedness, pride, stubbornness and ignorance. So beware you who deny the message that the same end will befall you. Allah's statement, وَمِنهُمْ مَّن يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ (And of them there are some who believe therein;) means that among those you were sent to, O Muhammad, are people who will believe in this Qur'an, follow you and benefit from what has been sent to you. وَمِنْهُمْ مَّن لاَّ يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ (and of them there are some who believe not therein,) but dies as a disbeliever and will be resurrected as such. وَرَبُّكَ أَعْلَمُ بِالْمُفْسِدِينَ (And your Lord is All-Aware of the mischief makers. ) He best knows those who deserve guidance, so He guides them, and those who deserve to go astray, He allows to go astray. Allah is, however, the Just who is never unjust. He gives everyone what they deserve. All Glory is His, the Exalted. There is no God but He. 10.38-41 Maududi - Sayyid Abul Ala Maududi - Tafhim al-Qur'an There is a general misunderstanding that the challenge of the Qur'an to produce (a book, nay,) a Surah like this, is in regard to its eloquent, pure and unique literary excellence. This has been the natural result of the way in which discussions have been carried on to prove the miracle of the Qur'an. But the Qur'an is far above this that it should claim to be a unique and matchless book because of its excellent diction. There is no doubt at all that it is unique and matchless in this respect also, but the real basis of its claim and challenge, that no human brain is capable of producing a book like this, is its subject-matter and teachings. The Qur'an itself has stated at different places those aspects which are a sure proof of its revelation from Allah and the refutation of the false aspersions that it was a human invention. This has already been explained at appropriate places and will be explained in the succeeding pages. (For further explanation see E.N. 26, 27 of LII). They could declare the Qur'an as forged on two grounds only but neither of these existed: First, if they had had a proof that the Book had not been revealed by Allah, but had been forged by someone; secondly, that the Truths enunciated in it and the information given in it were false. But no one could say on the basis of true knowledge that the Book had been really forged and then ascribed to God: nor could anyone say that he had peeped behind the curtains of the "unseen" and discovered that there was not One God (as taught in this Book) but many gods in the heavens: nor could anyone assert on the basis of true knowledge that there wen no angels, no Revelations and no God, but these wen mere fictions that had been invented by some fertile imagination: nor had anyone witnessed by actually visiting the "Hereafter" that the information about rewards and punishments was utterly wrong. But in spite of the lack of any proof to the contrary; they were challenging the genuineness of the Qur'an with the boldness and impudence of one who had made a thorough research into the matter and proved it to the hilt. Those who do not believe in the Qur'an have been called "mischief makers" because their rejection is not based on any sound reason but on prejudice and selfishness and because it prevents others from believing in it."And your Lord knows them very well" because there is nothing that is hidden from Him. They can deceive the people that they are rejecting the Qur'an because they are convinced that it is not the Book of God, but they cannot deceive Allah that they are doing this with good intentions for he knows that it is because of their mischief. They are obdurate and obstinate and arc suppressing the voice of their consciences and hearts: they deliberately shut their ears and minds against the Truth and prefer their worldly interests their fancies, their lusts and desires to it. That is why they cannot be regarded as "innocent" sinners, but they arc, in fact, the "mischief-makers." This is to say, "I don't want to enter into useless discussions and disputes with you on this score. If I am an impostor, I alone shall bear the consequences for it; and if you are rejecting the truth, you are not doing any harm to me but to yourselves alone." 