URL: https://quranx.com/hadith/Muslim/Hadith-520
REFS: Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 520a ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 4, Hadith 1056 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 520b ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 4, Hadith 1057
EN: Abu Dharr reported: I said: Messenger of Allah, which mosque was set up first on the earth? He said: Al-Masjid al-Haram (the sacred). I (again) said: Then which next? He said: It was the Masjid Aqsa. I (again) said: How long the space of time (between their setting up)? He (the Holy Prophet) said: It was forty years. And whenever the time comes for prayer, pray there, for that is a mosque; and in the hadith transmitted by Abu Kamil (the words are):" Whenever time comes for prayer, pray, for that is a mosque (for you)."
Ibrahim b. Yazid al-Tayml reported: I used to read the Qur'an with my father in the vestibule (before the door of the mosque). When I recited the ayat (verses) concerning prostration, he prostrated himself. I said to him: Father, do you prostrate yourself in the path? He said: I heard Abu Dharr saying: I asked the Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) about the mosque that was first set up on the earth. He said: Masjid Harim. I said: Then which next? He said: The Masjid al-Aqsa. I said: How long is the space of time between the two? He said: Forty years. He (then) further said: The earth is a mosque for you, so wherever you are at the time of prayer, pray there.
AR: حَدَّثَنِي أَبُو كَامِلٍ الْجَحْدَرِيُّ، حَدَّثَنَا عَبْدُ الْوَاحِدِ، حَدَّثَنَا الأَعْمَشُ، ح قَالَ وَحَدَّثَنَا أَبُو بَكْرِ بْنُ أَبِي شَيْبَةَ، وَأَبُو كُرَيْبٍ قَالاَ حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو مُعَاوِيَةَ، عَنِ الأَعْمَشِ، عَنْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ التَّيْمِيِّ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ، عَنْ أَبِي ذَرٍّ، قَالَ قُلْتُ يَا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ أَىُّ مَسْجِدٍ وُضِعَ فِي الأَرْضِ أَوَّلُ قَالَ ‏"‏ الْمَسْجِدُ الْحَرَامُ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قُلْتُ ثُمَّ أَىٌّ قَالَ ‏"‏ الْمَسْجِدُ الأَقْصَى ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قُلْتُ كَمْ بَيْنَهُمَا قَالَ ‏"‏ أَرْبَعُونَ سَنَةً وَأَيْنَمَا أَدْرَكَتْكَ الصَّلاَةُ فَصَلِّ فَهُوَ مَسْجِدٌ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ وَفِي حَدِيثِ أَبِي كَامِلٍ ‏"‏ ثُمَّ حَيْثُمَا أَدْرَكَتْكَ الصَّلاَةُ فَصَلِّهْ فَإِنَّهُ مَسْجِدٌ ‏"‏ ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنِي عَلِيُّ بْنُ حُجْرٍ السَّعْدِيُّ، أَخْبَرَنَا عَلِيُّ بْنُ مُسْهِرٍ، حَدَّثَنَا الأَعْمَشُ، عَنْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ بْنِ يَزِيدَ التَّيْمِيِّ، قَالَ كُنْتُ أَقْرَأُ عَلَى أَبِي الْقُرْآنَ فِي السُّدَّةِ فَإِذَا قَرَأْتُ السَّجْدَةَ سَجَدَ فَقُلْتُ لَهُ يَا أَبَتِ أَتَسْجُدُ فِي الطَّرِيقِ قَالَ إِنِّي سَمِعْتُ أَبَا ذَرٍّ يَقُولُ سَأَلْتُ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم عَنْ أَوَّلِ مَسْجِدٍ وُضِعَ فِي الأَرْضِ قَالَ ‏"‏ الْمَسْجِدُ الْحَرَامُ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قُلْتُ ثُمَّ أَىٌّ قَالَ ‏"‏ الْمَسْجِدُ الأَقْصَى ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قُلْتُ كَمْ بَيْنَهُمَا قَالَ ‏"‏ أَرْبَعُونَ عَامًا ثُمَّ الأَرْضُ لَكَ مَسْجِدٌ فَحَيْثُمَا أَدْرَكَتْكَ الصَّلاَةُ فَصَلِّ ‏"‏ ‏.‏
