URL: https://quranx.com/hadith/Muslim/Hadith-2865
REFS: Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2865a ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 40, Hadith 6853 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2865b ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 40, Hadith 6854 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2865c ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 40, Hadith 6855 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2865d ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 40, Hadith 6856
EN: 'Iyad b. Him-ar reported that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), while delivering a sermon one day, said: Behold, my Lord commanded me that I should teach you which you do not know and which He has taught me today. (He has instructed thus): The property which I have conferred upon them is lawful for them. I have created My servants as one having a natural inclination to the worship of Allah but it is Satan who turns them away from the right religion and he makes unlawful what has been declared lawful for them and he commands them to ascribe partnership with Me, although he has no justification for that. And verily, Allah looked towards the people of the world and He showed hatred for the Arabs and the non-Arabs, but with the exception of some remnants from the People of the Book. And He (further) said: I have sent thee (the Holy Prophet) in order to put you to test and put (those to test) through you. And I sent the Book to you which cannot be washed away by water, so that you may recite it while in the state of wakefulness or sleep. Verily, Allah commanded me to burn (kill) the Quraish. I said: My Lord, they would break my head (like the tearing) of bread, and Allah said: You turn them out as they turned you out, you fight against them and We shall help you in this, you should spend and you would be conferred upon. You send an army and I would send an army five times greater than that. Fight against those who disobey you along with those who obey you. The inmates of Paradise are three: One who wields authority and is just and fair, one who Is truthful and has been endowed with power to do good deeds. And the person who is merciful and kind hearted towards his relatives and to every pious Muslim, and one who does not stretch his hand in spite of having a large family to support. And He said: The inmates of Hell are five: the weak who lack power to (avoid evil), the (carefree) who pursue (everything irrespective of the fact that it is good or evil) and who do not have any care for their family or for their wealth. And those dishonest whose greed cannot be concealed even in the case of minor things. And the third. who betray you. morning and evening, in regard to your family and your property. He also made a mention of the miser and the liar and those who are in the habit of abusing people and using obscene and foul language. Abu Ghassan in his narration did not make mention of" Spend and there would be spent for you."
This hadith has been narrated on the authority of Qatada with the same chain of transmitters but with a slight variation of wording.
This hadith has been transmitted on the authority of 'Iyad b. Himar that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) gave an address one day. The rest of the hadith is the same.
Iyad. b. Himar reported tbat, while Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) was delivering an address, he stated that Allah commanded me The rest of the hadith is the same, and there is an addition in it: " Allah revealed to me that we should be humble amongst ourselves and none should show pride upon the others, And it does not behove one to do so, and He also said: There are among you people to follow not caring a bit for their family and property. Qatada said: Abu Abdullah, would this happen? Thereupon he said: Yes. By Allah, I found this in the days of ignorance that a person grazed the goat of a tribe and did not find anyone but their slave-girl (and he did not spare her) but committed adultery with her.
AR: حَدَّثَنِي أَبُو غَسَّانَ الْمِسْمَعِيُّ، وَمُحَمَّدُ بْنُ الْمُثَنَّى، وَمُحَمَّدُ بْنُ بَشَّارِ بْنِ عُثْمَانَ، - وَاللَّفْظُ لأَبِي غَسَّانَ وَابْنِ الْمُثَنَّى - قَالاَ حَدَّثَنَا مُعَاذُ بْنُ هِشَامٍ، حَدَّثَنِي أَبِي، عَنْ قَتَادَةَ، عَنْ مُطَرِّفِ بْنِ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ الشِّخِّيرِ، عَنْ عِيَاضِ بْنِ حِمَارٍ الْمُجَاشِعِيِّ، أَنَّ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم قَالَ ذَاتَ يَوْمٍ فِي خُطْبَتِهِ ‏"‏ أَلاَ إِنَّ رَبِّي أَمَرَنِي أَنْ أُعَلِّمَكُمْ مَا جَهِلْتُمْ مِمَّا عَلَّمَنِي يَوْمِي هَذَا كُلُّ مَالٍ نَحَلْتُهُ عَبْدًا حَلاَلٌ وَإِنِّي خَلَقْتُ عِبَادِي حُنَفَاءَ كُلَّهُمْ وَإِنَّهُمْ أَتَتْهُمُ الشَّيَاطِينُ فَاجْتَالَتْهُمْ عَنْ دِينِهِمْ وَحَرَّمَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ مَا أَحْلَلْتُ لَهُمْ وَأَمَرَتْهُمْ أَنْ يُشْرِكُوا بِي مَا لَمْ أُنْزِلْ بِهِ سُلْطَانًا وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ نَظَرَ إِلَى أَهْلِ الأَرْضِ فَمَقَتَهُمْ عَرَبَهُمْ وَعَجَمَهُمْ إِلاَّ بَقَايَا مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ وَقَالَ إِنَّمَا بَعَثْتُكَ لأَبْتَلِيَكَ وَأَبْتَلِيَ بِكَ وَأَنْزَلْتُ عَلَيْكَ كِتَابًا لاَ يَغْسِلُهُ الْمَاءُ تَقْرَؤُهُ نَائِمًا وَيَقْظَانَ وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ أَمَرَنِي أَنْ أُحَرِّقَ قُرَيْشًا فَقُلْتُ رَبِّ إِذًا يَثْلَغُوا رَأْسِي فَيَدَعُوهُ خُبْزَةً قَالَ اسْتَخْرِجْهُمْ كَمَا اسْتَخْرَجُوكَ وَاغْزُهُمْ نُغْزِكَ وَأَنْفِقْ فَسَنُنْفِقَ عَلَيْكَ وَابْعَثْ جَيْشًا نَبْعَثْ خَمْسَةً مِثْلَهُ وَقَاتِلْ بِمَنْ أَطَاعَكَ مَنْ عَصَاكَ ‏.‏ قَالَ وَأَهْلُ الْجَنَّةِ ثَلاَثَةٌ ذُو سُلْطَانٍ مُقْسِطٌ مُتَصَدِّقٌ مُوَفَّقٌ وَرَجُلٌ رَحِيمٌ رَقِيقُ الْقَلْبِ لِكُلِّ ذِي قُرْبَى وَمُسْلِمٍ وَعَفِيفٌ مُتَعَفِّفٌ ذُو عِيَالٍ - قَالَ - وَأَهْلُ النَّارِ خَمْسَةٌ الضَّعِيفُ الَّذِي لاَ زَبْرَ لَهُ الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِيكُمْ تَبَعًا لاَ يَتْبَعُونَ أَهْلاً وَلاَ مَالاً وَالْخَائِنُ الَّذِي لاَ يَخْفَى لَهُ طَمَعٌ وَإِنْ دَقَّ إِلاَّ خَانَهُ وَرَجُلٌ لاَ يُصْبِحُ وَلاَ يُمْسِي إِلاَّ وَهُوَ يُخَادِعُكَ عَنْ أَهْلِكَ وَمَالِكَ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ وَذَكَرَ الْبُخْلَ أَوِ الْكَذِبَ ‏"‏ وَالشِّنْظِيرُ الْفَحَّاشُ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ وَلَمْ يَذْكُرْ أَبُو غَسَّانَ فِي حَدِيثِهِ ‏"‏ وَأَنْفِقْ فَسَنُنْفِقَ عَلَيْكَ ‏"‏ ‏.‏
وَحَدَّثَنَاهُ مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ الْمُثَنَّى الْعَنَزِيُّ، حَدَّثَنَا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ أَبِي عَدِيٍّ، عَنْ سَعِيدٍ، عَنْ قَتَادَةَ، بِهَذَا الإِسْنَادِ ‏.‏ وَلَمْ يَذْكُرْ فِي حَدِيثِهِ ‏ "‏ كُلُّ مَالٍ نَحَلْتُهُ عَبْدًا حَلاَلٌ ‏" ‏ ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنِي عَبْدُ الرَّحْمَنِ بْنُ بِشْرٍ الْعَبْدِيُّ، حَدَّثَنَا يَحْيَى بْنُ سَعِيدٍ، عَنْ هِشَامٍ، - صَاحِبِ الدَّسْتَوَائِيِّ - حَدَّثَنَا قَتَادَةُ، عَنْ مُطَرِّفٍ، عَنْ عِيَاضِ بْنِ حِمَارٍ، أَنَّ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم خَطَبَ ذَاتَ يَوْمٍ ‏.‏ وَسَاقَ الْحَدِيثَ وَقَالَ فِي آخِرِهِ قَالَ يَحْيَى قَالَ شُعْبَةُ عَنْ قَتَادَةَ قَالَ سَمِعْتُ مُطَرِّفًا فِي هَذَا الْحَدِيثِ ‏.‏
وَحَدَّثَنِي أَبُو عَمَّارٍ، حُسَيْنُ بْنُ حُرَيْثٍ حَدَّثَنَا الْفَضْلُ بْنُ مُوسَى، عَنِ الْحُسَيْنِ، عَنْ مَطَرٍ، حَدَّثَنِي قَتَادَةُ، عَنْ مُطَرِّفِ بْنِ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ الشِّخِّيرِ، عَنْ عِيَاضِ بْنِ حِمَارٍ، أَخِي بَنِي مُجَاشِعٍ قَالَ قَامَ فِينَا رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ذَاتَ يَوْمٍ خَطِيبًا فَقَالَ ‏"‏ إِنَّ اللَّهَ أَمَرَنِي ‏"‏ ‏.‏ وَسَاقَ الْحَدِيثَ بِمِثْلِ حَدِيثِ هِشَامٍ عَنْ قَتَادَةَ وَزَادَ فِيهِ ‏"‏ وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ أَوْحَى إِلَىَّ أَنْ تَوَاضَعُوا حَتَّى لاَ يَفْخَرَ أَحَدٌ عَلَى أَحَدٍ وَلاَ يَبْغِي أَحَدٌ عَلَى أَحَدٍ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ وَقَالَ فِي حَدِيثِهِ ‏"‏ وَهُمْ فِيكُمْ تَبَعًا لاَ يَبْغُونَ أَهْلاً وَلاَ مَالاً ‏"‏ ‏.‏ فَقُلْتُ فَيَكُونُ ذَلِكَ يَا أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ قَالَ نَعَمْ وَاللَّهِ لَقَدْ أَدْرَكْتُهُمْ فِي الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ وَإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَرْعَى عَلَى الْحَىِّ مَا بِهِ إِلاَّ وَلِيدَتُهُمْ يَطَؤُهَا ‏.‏
