URL: https://quranx.com/hadith/Bukhari/DarusSalam/Hadith-2125
REFS: Collection Sahih Bukhari ; Dar-us-Salam reference Hadith 2125 ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Volume 3, Book 34, Hadith 335
EN: Narrated Ata bin Yasar: I met `Abdullah bin `Amr bin Al-`As and asked him, "Tell me about the description of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) which is mentioned in Torah (i.e. revelation given to Musa (as).") He replied, 'Yes. By Allah, he is described in Torah with some of the qualities attributed to him in the Qur'an as follows: "O Prophet ! We have sent you as a witness (for Allah's True religion) And a giver of glad tidings (to the faithful believers), And a warner (to the unbelievers) And guardian of the illiterates. You are My slave and My messenger (i.e. Apostle). I have named you "Al-Mutawakkil" (who depends upon Allah). You are neither discourteous, harsh Nor a noisemaker in the markets And you do not do evil to those Who do evil to you, but you deal With them with forgiveness and kindness. Allah will not let him (the Prophet) Die till he makes straight the crooked people by making them say: "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah," With which will be opened blind eyes And deaf ears and enveloped hearts."
AR: حَدَّثَنَا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ سِنَانٍ، حَدَّثَنَا فُلَيْحٌ، حَدَّثَنَا هِلاَلٌ، عَنْ عَطَاءِ بْنِ يَسَارٍ، قَالَ لَقِيتُ عَبْدَ اللَّهِ بْنَ عَمْرِو بْنِ الْعَاصِ ـ رضى الله عنهما ـ قُلْتُ أَخْبِرْنِي عَنْ صِفَةِ، رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فِي التَّوْرَاةِ‏.‏ قَالَ أَجَلْ، وَاللَّهِ إِنَّهُ لَمَوْصُوفٌ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ بِبَعْضِ صِفَتِهِ فِي الْقُرْآنِ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ شَاهِدًا وَمُبَشِّرًا وَنَذِيرًا، وَحِرْزًا لِلأُمِّيِّينَ، أَنْتَ عَبْدِي وَرَسُولِي سَمَّيْتُكَ الْمُتَوَكِّلَ، لَيْسَ بِفَظٍّ وَلاَ غَلِيظٍ وَلاَ سَخَّابٍ فِي الأَسْوَاقِ، وَلاَ يَدْفَعُ بِالسَّيِّئَةِ السَّيِّئَةَ وَلَكِنْ يَعْفُو وَيَغْفِرُ، وَلَنْ يَقْبِضَهُ اللَّهُ حَتَّى يُقِيمَ بِهِ الْمِلَّةَ الْعَوْجَاءَ بِأَنْ يَقُولُوا لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ اللَّهُ‏.‏ وَيَفْتَحُ بِهَا أَعْيُنًا عُمْيًا، وَآذَانًا صُمًّا، وَقُلُوبًا غُلْفًا‏.‏ تَابَعَهُ عَبْدُ الْعَزِيزِ بْنُ أَبِي سَلَمَةَ عَنْ هِلاَلٍ‏.‏ وَقَالَ سَعِيدٌ عَنْ هِلاَلٍ عَنْ عَطَاءٍ عَنِ ابْنِ سَلاَمٍ‏.‏ غُلْفٌ كُلُّ شَىْءٍ فِي غِلاَفٍ، سَيْفٌ أَغْلَفُ، وَقَوْسٌ غَلْفَاءُ، وَرَجُلٌ أَغْلَفُ إِذَا لَمْ يَكُنْ مَخْتُونًا‏.‏
