URL: https://quranx.com/hadith/Muslim/Hadith-2658
REFS: Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2658a ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 33, Hadith 6422 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2658b ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 33, Hadith 6423 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2658c ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 33, Hadith 6424 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2658d ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 33, Hadith 6425 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2658e ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 33, Hadith 6426 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2658f ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 33, Hadith 6427 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 2658g ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 33, Hadith 6428
EN: Abu Huraira reported Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) as saying. Allah fixed the very portion of adultery which a man will indulge in. There would be no escape from it. The adultery of the eye is the lustful look and the adultery of the ears is listening to voluptuous (song or talk) and the adultery of the tongue is licentious speech and the adultery of the hand is the lustful grip (embrace) and the adultery of the feet is to walk (to the place) where he intends to commit adultery and the heart yearns and desires which he may or may not put into effect.
There is none born but is created to his true nature (Islam). It is his parents who make him a Jew or a Christian or a Magian quite as beasts produce their young with their limbs perfect. Do you see anything deficient in them? Then he quoted the Qur'an., The nature made by Allah in which He has created men there is no altering of Allah's creation; that is the right religion" (ar-Rum:30)
This hadith has been narrated on the authority of Zuhri with the same chain of transmitters and there is no mention of his deficiency in limbs.
Abu Huraira reported Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) as saying: No child is born but upon Fitra. He then said. Recite: The nature made by Allah in which He created man, there is no altering of Allah's nature; that is the right religion."
Abu Huraira reported Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) as saying: No babe is born but upon Fitra. It is his parents who make him a Jew or a Christian or a Polytheist. A person said: Allah's Messenger, what is your opinion if they were to die before that (before reaching the age of adolescence when they can distinguish between right and wrong)? He said: It is Allah alone Who knows what they would be doing.
It is reported on the authority of Abu Mu'awiya that (the Holy Prophet) said: Every new-born babe is born on the millat (of Islam and he) remains on this until his tongue is enabled to express himself. This hadith has been narratted on the authority of Abu Mu'awiya through another chain of transmitters (and the words are):" Every child is born but on this Fitra so long as he does not express himself with his tongue."
Abu Huraira reported from Allah's Messenger (may peace be upom him) many ahadith and one amongst them is that he is reported to have said: An infant is born according to his (true) nature. It is his parents Who make him a Jew, a Christian, just as a she-camel gives birth to its young ones. Do you find any deficiency in their limbs? You cut their ears (i. e. after birth). They (the Companions of the Holy Prophet) said: What is your opinion about him who dies in infancy? Thereupon Allah's Apostle (ﷺ) said: It is Allah alone Who knows best what they would be doing.
AR: حَدَّثَنَا إِسْحَاقُ بْنُ مَنْصُورٍ، أَخْبَرَنَا أَبُو هِشَامٍ الْمَخْزُومِيُّ، حَدَّثَنَا وُهَيْبٌ، حَدَّثَنَا سُهَيْلُ بْنُ أَبِي صَالِحٍ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ، عَنْ أَبِي هُرَيْرَةَ، عَنِ النَّبِيِّ صلى الله عليه وسلم قَالَ ‏ "‏ كُتِبَ عَلَى ابْنِ آدَمَ نَصِيبُهُ مِنَ الزِّنَى مُدْرِكٌ ذَلِكَ لاَ مَحَالَةَ فَالْعَيْنَانِ زِنَاهُمَا النَّظَرُ وَالأُذُنَانِ زِنَاهُمَا الاِسْتِمَاعُ وَاللِّسَانُ زِنَاهُ الْكَلاَمُ وَالْيَدُ زِنَاهَا الْبَطْشُ وَالرِّجْلُ زِنَاهَا الْخُطَا وَالْقَلْبُ يَهْوَى وَيَتَمَنَّى وَيُصَدِّقُ ذَلِكَ الْفَرْجُ وَيُكَذِّبُهُ ‏" ‏ ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنَا حَاجِبُ بْنُ الْوَلِيدِ، حَدَّثَنَا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ حَرْبٍ، عَنِ الزُّبَيْدِيِّ، عَنِ الزُّهْرِيِّ، أَخْبَرَنِي سَعِيدُ بْنُ الْمُسَيَّبِ، عَنْ أَبِي هُرَيْرَةَ، أَنَّهُ كَانَ يَقُولُ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏"‏ مَا مِنْ مَوْلُودٍ إِلاَّ يُولَدُ عَلَى الْفِطْرَةِ فَأَبَوَاهُ يُهَوِّدَانِهِ وَيُنَصِّرَانِهِ وَيُمَجِّسَانِهِ كَمَا تُنْتَجُ الْبَهِيمَةُ بَهِيمَةً جَمْعَاءَ هَلْ تُحِسُّونَ فِيهَا مِنْ جَدْعَاءَ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ ثُمَّ يَقُولُ أَبُو هُرَيْرَةَ وَاقْرَءُوا إِنْ شِئْتُمْ ‏{‏ فِطْرَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا لاَ تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ‏}‏ الآيَةَ ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو بَكْرِ بْنُ أَبِي شَيْبَةَ، حَدَّثَنَا عَبْدُ الأَعْلَى، ح وَحَدَّثَنَا عَبْدُ بْنُ حُمَيْدٍ، أَخْبَرَنَا عَبْدُ الرَّزَّاقِ، كِلاَهُمَا عَنْ مَعْمَرٍ، عَنِ الزُّهْرِيِّ، بِهَذَا الإِسْنَادِ وَقَالَ ‏ "‏ كَمَا تُنْتَجُ الْبَهِيمَةُ بَهِيمَةً ‏" ‏ ‏.‏ وَلَمْ يَذْكُرْ جَمْعَاءَ ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنِي أَبُو الطَّاهِرِ، وَأَحْمَدُ بْنُ عِيسَى، قَالاَ حَدَّثَنَا ابْنُ وَهْبٍ، أَخْبَرَنِي يُونُسُ بْنُ، يَزِيِدَ عَنِ ابْنِ شِهَابٍ، أَنَّ أَبَا سَلَمَةَ بْنَ عَبْدِ الرَّحْمَنِ، أَخْبَرَهُ أَنَّ أَبَا هُرَيْرَةَ قَالَ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏"‏ مَا مِنْ مَوْلُودٍ إِلاَّ يُولَدُ عَلَى الْفِطْرَةِ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ ثُمَّ يَقُولُ اقْرَءُوا ‏{‏ فِطْرَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا لاَ تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ الدِّينُ الْقَيِّمُ‏}‏
حَدَّثَنَا زُهَيْرُ بْنُ حَرْبٍ، حَدَّثَنَا جَرِيرٌ، عَنِ الأَعْمَشِ، عَنْ أَبِي صَالِحٍ، عَنْ أَبِي هُرَيْرَةَ، قَالَ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏"‏ مَا مِنْ مَوْلُودٍ إِلاَّ يُلِدَ عَلَى الْفِطْرَةِ فَأَبَوَاهُ يُهَوِّدَانِهِ وَيُنَصِّرَانِهِ وَيُشَرِّكَانِهِ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ فَقَالَ رَجُلٌ يَا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ أَرَأَيْتَ لَوْ مَاتَ قَبْلَ ذَلِكَ قَالَ ‏"‏ اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا كَانُوا عَامِلِينَ ‏"‏ ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو بَكْرِ بْنُ أَبِي شَيْبَةَ، وَأَبُو كُرَيْبٍ قَالاَ حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو مُعَاوِيَةَ، ح وَحَدَّثَنَا ابْنُ، نُمَيْرٍ حَدَّثَنَا أَبِي كِلاَهُمَا، عَنِ الأَعْمَشِ، بِهَذَا الإِسْنَادِ ‏.‏ فِي حَدِيثِ ابْنِ نُمَيْرٍ ‏"‏ مَا مِنْ مَوْلُودٍ يُولَدُ إِلاَّ وَهُوَ عَلَى الْمِلَّةِ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ وَفِي رِوَايَةِ أَبِي بَكْرٍ عَنْ أَبِي مُعَاوِيَةَ ‏"‏ إِلاَّ عَلَى هَذِهِ الْمِلَّةِ حَتَّى يُبَيِّنَ عَنْهُ لِسَانُهُ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ وَفِي رِوَايَةِ أَبِي كُرَيْبٍ عَنْ أَبِي مُعَاوِيَةَ ‏"‏ لَيْسَ مِنْ مَوْلُودٍ يُولَدُ إِلاَّ عَلَى هَذِهِ الْفِطْرَةِ حَتَّى يُعَبِّرَ عَنْهُ لِسَانُهُ ‏"‏ ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنَا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ رَافِعٍ، حَدَّثَنَا عَبْدُ الرَّزَّاقِ، حَدَّثَنَا مَعْمَرٌ، عَنْ هَمَّامِ بْنِ مُنَبِّهٍ، قَالَ هَذَا مَا حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو هُرَيْرَةَ، عَنْ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏.‏ فَذَكَرَ أَحَادِيثَ مِنْهَا وَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏"‏ مَنْ يُولَدُ يُولَدُ عَلَى هَذِهِ الْفِطْرَةِ فَأَبَوَاهُ يُهَوِّدَانِهِ وَيُنَصِّرَانِهِ كَمَا تَنْتِجُونَ الإِبِلَ فَهَلْ تَجِدُونَ فِيهَا جَدْعَاءَ حَتَّى تَكُونُوا أَنْتُمْ تَجْدَعُونَهَا ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قَالُوا يَا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ أَفَرَأَيْتَ مَنْ يَمُوتُ صَغِيرًا قَالَ ‏"‏ اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا كَانُوا عَامِلِينَ ‏"‏ ‏.‏
