URL: https://quranx.com/hadith/Muslim/Hadith-1365
REFS: Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1365a ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 7, Hadith 3157 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1365b ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 7, Hadith 3158 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1365c ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 8, Hadith 3325 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1365d ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 8, Hadith 3326 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1365e ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 8, Hadith 3328 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1365f ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 8, Hadith 3329 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1365g ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 19, Hadith 4437 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1365h ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 19, Hadith 4438 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1365i ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 19, Hadith 4439
EN: Anas b. Malik (Allah be pleased with him) reported that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said to Abu Talha (Allah be pleased with him): Find for me a servant from amongst your boys to serve me. Abu Talha went out along with me and made me sit behind him. And I used to serve Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) whenever he got down from the camel. And in one hadith he said: He proceeded and when (the mountain of) Uhud was within sight, he said: This is the mountain which loves us and we love it. And as he came close to Medina he said: O Allah, I declare (the area) between the two mountains of it (Medina) sacred just as Ibrahim declared Mecca as sacred. O Allah, bless them (the people of Medina) in their mudd and sa'.
Anas b. Malik reported a hadith like this from Allah's Apostle (ﷺ) except with this variation that he said: " I declare sacred the area between its two lava mountains."
Anas (Allah be pleased with him) reported that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) set out on an expedition to Khaibar and we observed our morning prayer in early hours of the dawn. The Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) then mounted and so did Abu Talha ride, and I was seating myself behind Abu Talha. Allah's Apostle (ﷺ) moved in the narrow street of Khaibar (and we rode so close to each other in the street) that my knee touched the leg of Allah's Apostle (ﷺ). (A part of the) lower garment of Allah's Apostle (ﷺ) slipped from his leg and I could see the whiteness of the leg of Allah's Apostle (ﷺ). As he entered the habitation he called: Allahu Akbar (Allah is the Greatest). Khaibar is ruined. And when we get down in the valley of a people evil is the morning of the warned ones. He repeated it thrice. In the meanwhile the people went out for their work, and said: By Allah, Muhammad (has come). Abd al-'Aziz or some of our companions said: Muhammad and the army (have come). He said: We took it (the territory of Khaibar) by force, and there were gathered the prisoners of war. There came Dihya and he said: Messenger of Allah, bestow upon me a girl from among the prisoners. He said: Go and get any girl. He made a choice for Safiyya daughter of Huyayy (b. Akhtab). There came a person to Allah's Apostle (ﷺ) and said: Apostle of Allah, you have bestowed Safiyya bint Huyayy, the chief of Quraiza and al-Nadir, upon Dihya and she is worthy of you only. He said: Call him along with her. So he came along with her. When Allah's Apostle (ﷺ) saw her he said: Take any other woman from among the prisoners. He (the narrator) said: He (the Holy Prophet) then granted her emancipation and married her. Thabit said to him: Abu Hamza, how much dower did he (the Holy Prophet) give to her? He said: He granted her freedom and then married her. On the way Umm Sulaim embellished her and then sent her to him (the Holy Prophet) at night. Allah's Apostle (ﷺ) appeared as a bridegroom in the morning. He (the Holy Prophet) said: He who has anything (to eat) should bring that. Then the cloth was spread. A person came with cheese, another came with dates, and still another came with refined butter, and they prepared hais and that was the wedding feast of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)
This hadith has been narrated through another chain of transmitters on the authority of Anas that Allah's Apostle (ﷺ) emancipated Safiyya, and her emancipation was treated as her wedding gift, and in the hadith transmitted by Mu'adh on the authority of his father (the words are): " He (the Holy Prophet) married Safiyya and bestowed her emancipation as her wedding gift."
Anas (Allah be pleased with him) reported: I was sitting behind Abu Talha on the Day of Khaibar and my feet touched the foot of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ), and we came (to the people of Khaibar) when the sun had risen and they had driven out their cattle, and had themselves come out with their axes, large baskets and hatchets, and they said: (Here come) Muhammad and the army. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said: Khaibar is ruined. Verily when we get down in the valley of a people, evil is the morning of the warned ones (al-Qur'an, xxxvii. 177). Allah, the Majestic and the Glorious, defeated them (the inhabitants of Khaibar), and there fell to the lot of Dihya a beautiful girl, and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) got her in exchange of seven heads, and then entrusted her to Umm Sulaim so that she might embellish her and prepare her (for marriage) with him. He (the narrator) said: He had been under the impression that he had said that so that she might spend her period of 'Iddah in her (Umm Sulaim's) house. (The woman) was Safiyya daughter of Huyayy. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) arranged the wedding feast consisting of dates, cheese, and refined butter, and pits were dug and tiers were set in them dining cloths, and there was brought cheese and refined butter, and these were placed there. And the people ate to their fill, and they said: We do not know whether he (the Holy Prophet) had married her (as a free woman), or as a slave woman. They said: If he (the Holy Prophet) would make her wear the veil, then she would be a (free married) woman, and if he would not make her wear the veil, then she should be a slave woman. When he intended to ride, he made her wear the veil and she sat on the hind part of the camel; so they came to know that he had married her. As they approached Medina, Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) drove (his ride) quickly and so we did. 'Adba' (the name of Allah's Apostle's camel) stumbled and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) fell down and she (Radrat Safiyya: also fell down. He (the Holy Prophet) stood up and covered her. Women looked towards her and said: May Allah keep away the Jewess! He (the narrator) said: I said: Aba Hamza, did Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) really fall down? He said: Yes, by Allah, he in fact fell down.
Anas, (Allah be pleased with him) reported: Safiyya (Allah be pleased with her) fell to the lot of Dihya in the spoils of war, and they praised her in the presence of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and said: We have not seen the like of her among the captives of war. He sent (a messenger) to Dihya and he gave him whatever he demanded. He then sent her to my mother and asked her to embellish her. Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) then got out of Khaibar until when he was on the other side of it, he halted, and a tent was pitched for him. When it was morning Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said: He who has surplus of provision with him should bring that to us. Some persons would bring the surplus of dates, and the other surplus of mush of barley until there became a heap of bals. They began to eat the hais and began to drink out of the pond which had the water of rainfall in it and which was situated by their side. Anas said that that constituted the wedding feast of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ). He (further) said: We proceeded until we saw the walls of Medina, and we were delighted. We made our mounts run quickly and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) also made his mount run quickly. And Safiyya (Allah be pleased with her) was at his back, and Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) had seated her behind him. The camel of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) stumbled and he (the Holy Prophet) fell down and she also fell down. And none among the people was seeing him and her, until Allah's Messeuger (ﷺ) stood up and he covered her, and we came to him and he said: We have received no injury. We entered Medina and there came out the young ladies of the household. They saw her (hadrat Safiyya) and blamed her for falling down.
It has been narrated on the authority of Anas that the Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) raided Khaibar. One morning we offered prayers in the darkness of early dawn (near Khaibar). Then the Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) mounted (his horse). Abu Talha mounted his and I mounted behind Abu Talha on the same horse. The Prophet of Allah (ﷺ) rode through the streets of Khaibar and (I rode so close to him) that my knee touched the thigh of the Prophet of Allah (ﷺ). The wrapper got aside from his thigh, and I could see its whiteness. When he entered the town, he said: God is Great. Khaibar shall face destruction. When we descend in the city-square of a people, it is a bad day for them who have been warned (and have not taken heed). He said these words thrice. The people of the town had just come out from (their houses) to go about their jobs. They said (in surprise): Muhammad has come. We captured Khaibar by force.
It has been narrated (through another chain of transmitters) on the authority of the same narrator (i. e. Anas) who said: I was riding behind Abu Talha on the day of the Battle of Khaibar (and we were riding so close to the Prophet that) my foot would touch his We encountered the people at sunrise when they had come out with their axes, spades and strings driving their cattle along. They shouted (in surprise): Muhammad has come along with his force! The Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) said: Khaibar shall face destruction. Behold! when we descend in the city-square of a people, it is a bad day for those who have been warned (but have not taken heed). Allah, the Glorious and Majestic, inflicted defeat upon them.
This hadith has been transmitted on the authority of Anas b. Malik with a slight variation of words.
AR: حَدَّثَنَا يَحْيَى بْنُ أَيُّوبَ، وَقُتَيْبَةُ بْنُ سَعِيدٍ، وَابْنُ، حُجْرٍ جَمِيعًا عَنْ إِسْمَاعِيلَ، - قَالَ ابْنُ أَيُّوبَ حَدَّثَنَا إِسْمَاعِيلُ بْنُ جَعْفَرٍ، - أَخْبَرَنِي عَمْرُو بْنُ أَبِي عَمْرٍو، مَوْلَى الْمُطَّلِبِ بْنِ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ حَنْطَبٍ أَنَّهُ سَمِعَ أَنَسَ بْنَ مَالِكٍ، يَقُولُ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم لأَبِي طَلْحَةَ ‏"‏ الْتَمِسْ لِي غُلاَمًا مِنْ غِلْمَانِكُمْ يَخْدُمُنِي ‏"‏ ‏.‏ فَخَرَجَ بِي أَبُو طَلْحَةَ يُرْدِفُنِي وَرَاءَهُ فَكُنْتُ أَخْدُمُ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم كُلَّمَا نَزَلَ وَقَالَ فِي الْحَدِيثِ ثُمَّ أَقْبَلَ حَتَّى إِذَا بَدَا لَهُ أُحُدٌ قَالَ ‏"‏ هَذَا جَبَلٌ يُحِبُّنَا وَنُحِبُّهُ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ فَلَمَّا أَشْرَفَ عَلَى الْمَدِينَةِ قَالَ ‏"‏ اللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي أُحَرِّمُ مَا بَيْنَ جَبَلَيْهَا مِثْلَ مَا حَرَّمَ بِهِ إِبْرَاهِيمُ مَكَّةَ اللَّهُمَّ بَارِكْ لَهُمْ فِي مُدِّهِمْ وَصَاعِهِمْ ‏"‏ ‏.‏
وَحَدَّثَنَاهُ سَعِيدُ بْنُ مَنْصُورٍ، وَقُتَيْبَةُ بْنُ سَعِيدٍ، قَالاَ حَدَّثَنَا يَعْقُوبُ، - وَهُوَ ابْنُ عَبْدِ الرَّحْمَنِ الْقَارِيُّ - عَنْ عَمْرِو بْنِ أَبِي عَمْرٍو، عَنْ أَنَسِ بْنِ مَالِكٍ، عَنِ النَّبِيِّ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏.‏ بِمِثْلِهِ غَيْرَ أَنَّهُ قَالَ ‏ "‏ إِنِّي أُحَرِّمُ مَا بَيْنَ لاَبَتَيْهَا ‏" ‏ ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنِي زُهَيْرُ بْنُ حَرْبٍ، حَدَّثَنَا إِسْمَاعِيلُ، - يَعْنِي ابْنَ عُلَيَّةَ - عَنْ عَبْدِ الْعَزِيزِ، عَنْ أَنَسٍ، أَنَّ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم غَزَا خَيْبَرَ قَالَ فَصَلَّيْنَا عِنْدَهَا صَلاَةَ الْغَدَاةِ بِغَلَسٍ فَرَكِبَ نَبِيُّ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم وَرَكِبَ أَبُو طَلْحَةَ وَأَنَا رَدِيفُ أَبِي طَلْحَةَ فَأَجْرَى نَبِيُّ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فِي زُقَاقِ خَيْبَرَ وَإِنَّ رُكْبَتِي لَتَمَسُّ فَخِذَ نَبِيِّ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم وَانْحَسَرَ الإِزَارُ عَنْ فَخِذِ نَبِيِّ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فَإِنِّي لأَرَى بَيَاضَ فَخِذِ نَبِيِّ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فَلَمَّا دَخَلَ الْقَرْيَةَ قَالَ ‏"‏ اللَّهُ أَكْبَرُ خَرِبَتْ خَيْبَرُ إِنَّا إِذَا نَزَلْنَا بِسَاحَةِ قَوْمٍ فَسَاءَ صَبَاحُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قَالَهَا ثَلاَثَ مَرَّاتٍ قَالَ وَقَدْ خَرَجَ الْقَوْمُ إِلَى أَعْمَالِهِمْ فَقَالُوا مُحَمَّدٌ وَاللَّهِ ‏.‏ قَالَ عَبْدُ الْعَزِيزِ وَقَالَ بَعْضُ أَصْحَابِنَا مُحَمَّدٌ وَالْخَمِيسُ ‏.‏ قَالَ وَأَصَبْنَاهَا عَنْوَةً وَجُمِعَ السَّبْىُ فَجَاءَهُ دِحْيَةُ فَقَالَ يَا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ أَعْطِنِي جَارِيَةً مِنَ السَّبْىِ ‏.‏ فَقَالَ ‏"‏ اذْهَبْ فَخُذْ جَارِيَةً ‏"‏ ‏.‏ فَأَخَذَ صَفِيَّةَ بِنْتَ حُيَىٍّ فَجَاءَ رَجُلٌ إِلَى نَبِيِّ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فَقَالَ يَا نَبِيَّ اللَّهِ أَعْطَيْتَ دِحْيَةَ صَفِيَّةَ بِنْتَ حُيَىٍّ سَيِّدِ قُرَيْظَةَ وَالنَّضِيرِ مَا تَصْلُحُ إِلاَّ لَكَ ‏.‏ قَالَ ‏"‏ ادْعُوهُ بِهَا ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قَالَ فَجَاءَ بِهَا فَلَمَّا نَظَرَ إِلَيْهَا النَّبِيُّ صلى الله عليه وسلم قَالَ ‏"‏ خُذْ جَارِيَةً مِنَ السَّبْىِ غَيْرَهَا ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قَالَ وَأَعْتَقَهَا وَتَزَوَّجَهَا ‏.‏ فَقَالَ لَهُ ثَابِتٌ يَا أَبَا حَمْزَةَ مَا أَصْدَقَهَا قَالَ نَفْسَهَا أَعْتَقَهَا وَتَزَوَّجَهَا حَتَّى إِذَا كَانَ بِالطَّرِيقِ جَهَّزَتْهَا لَهُ أُمُّ سُلَيْمٍ فَأَهْدَتْهَا لَهُ مِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَأَصْبَحَ النَّبِيُّ صلى الله عليه وسلم عَرُوسًا فَقَالَ ‏"‏ مَنْ كَانَ عِنْدَهُ شَىْءٌ فَلْيَجِئْ بِهِ ‏"‏ قَالَ وَبَسَطَ نِطَعًا قَالَ فَجَعَلَ الرَّجُلُ يَجِيءُ بِالأَقِطِ وَجَعَلَ الرَّجُلُ يَجِيءُ بِالتَّمْرِ وَجَعَلَ الرَّجُلُ يَجِيءُ بِالسَّمْنِ فَحَاسُوا حَيْسًا ‏.‏ فَكَانَتْ وَلِيمَةَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏.‏
وَحَدَّثَنِي أَبُو الرَّبِيعِ الزَّهْرَانِيُّ، حَدَّثَنَا حَمَّادٌ، - يَعْنِي ابْنَ زَيْدٍ - عَنْ ثَابِتٍ، وَعَبْدِ، الْعَزِيزِ بْنِ صُهَيْبٍ عَنْ أَنَسٍ، ح وَحَدَّثَنَاهُ قُتَيْبَةُ بْنُ سَعِيدٍ، حَدَّثَنَا حَمَّادٌ، - يَعْنِي ابْنَ زَيْدٍ - عَنْ ثَابِتٍ، وَشُعَيْبِ، بْنِ حَبْحَابٍ عَنْ أَنَسٍ، ح وَحَدَّثَنَا قُتَيْبَةُ، حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو عَوَانَةَ، عَنْ قَتَادَةَ، وَعَبْدِ الْعَزِيزِ، عَنْ أَنَسٍ، ح وَحَدَّثَنَا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ عُبَيْدٍ الْغُبَرِيُّ، حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو عَوَانَةَ، عَنْ أَبِي عُثْمَانَ، عَنْ أَنَسٍ، ح وَحَدَّثَنِي زُهَيْرُ بْنُ حَرْبٍ، حَدَّثَنَا مُعَاذُ بْنُ هِشَامٍ، حَدَّثَنِي أَبِي، عَنْ شُعَيْبِ بْنِ الْحَبْحَابِ، عَنْ أَنَسٍ، ح وَحَدَّثَنِي مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ رَافِعٍ، حَدَّثَنَا يَحْيَى بْنُ آدَمَ، وَعُمَرُ بْنُ سَعْدٍ، وَعَبْدُ الرَّزَّاقِ، جَمِيعًا عَنْ سُفْيَانَ، عَنْ يُونُسَ بْنِ عُبَيْدٍ، عَنْ شُعَيْبِ بْنِ الْحَبْحَابِ، عَنْ أَنَسٍ، كُلُّهُمْ عَنِ النَّبِيِّ صلى الله عليه وسلم أَنَّهُ أَعْتَقَ صَفِيَّةَ وَجَعَلَ عِتْقَهَا صَدَاقَهَا ‏.‏ وَفِي حَدِيثِ مُعَاذٍ عَنْ أَبِيهِ تَزَوَّجَ صَفِيَّةَ وَأَصْدَقَهَا عِتْقَهَا.
حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو بَكْرِ بْنُ أَبِي شَيْبَةَ، حَدَّثَنَا عَفَّانُ، حَدَّثَنَا حَمَّادُ بْنُ سَلَمَةَ، حَدَّثَنَا ثَابِتٌ، عَنْ أَنَسٍ، قَالَ كُنْتُ رِدْفَ أَبِي طَلْحَةَ يَوْمَ خَيْبَرَ وَقَدَمِي تَمَسُّ قَدَمَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم - قَالَ - فَأَتَيْنَاهُمْ حِينَ بَزَغَتِ الشَّمْسُ وَقَدْ أَخْرَجُوا مَوَاشِيَهُمَ وَخَرَجُوا بِفُئُوسِهِمْ وَمَكَاتِلِهِمْ وَمُرُورِهِمْ فَقَالُوا مُحَمَّدٌ وَالْخَمِيسُ - قَالَ - وَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏ "‏ خَرِبَتْ خَيْبَرُ إِنَّا إِذَا نَزَلْنَا بِسَاحَةِ قَوْمٍ فَسَاءَ صَبَاحُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ ‏" ‏ ‏.‏ قَالَ وَهَزَمَهُمُ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ وَوَقَعَتْ فِي سَهْمِ دَحْيَةَ جَارِيَةٌ جَمِيلَةٌ فَاشْتَرَاهَا رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم بِسَبْعَةِ أَرْؤُسٍ ثُمَّ دَفَعَهَا إِلَى أُمِّ سُلَيْمٍ تُصَنِّعُهَا لَهُ وَتُهَيِّئُهَا - قَالَ وَأَحْسِبُهُ قَالَ - وَتَعْتَدُّ فِي بَيْتِهَا وَهِيَ صَفِيَّةُ بِنْتُ حُيَىٍّ - قَالَ - وَجَعَلَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم وَلِيمَتَهَا التَّمْرَ وَالأَقِطَ وَالسَّمْنَ فُحِصَتِ الأَرْضُ أَفَاحِيصَ وَجِيءَ بِالأَنْطَاعِ فَوُضِعَتْ فِيهَا وَجِيءَ بِالأَقِطِ وَالسَّمْنِ فَشَبِعَ النَّاسُ - قَالَ - وَقَالَ النَّاسُ لاَ نَدْرِي أَتَزَوَّجَهَا أَمِ اتَّخَذَهَا أُمَّ وَلَدٍ ‏.‏ قَالُوا إِنْ حَجَبَهَا فَهْىَ امْرَأَتُهُ وَإِنْ لَمْ يَحْجُبْهَا فَهْىَ أُمُّ وَلَدٍ فَلَمَّا أَرَادَ أَنْ يَرْكَبَ حَجَبَهَا فَقَعَدَتْ عَلَى عَجُزِ الْبَعِيرِ فَعَرَفُوا أَنَّهُ قَدْ تَزَوَّجَهَا ‏.‏ فَلَمَّا دَنَوْا مِنَ الْمَدِينَةِ دَفَعَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم وَدَفَعْنَا - قَالَ - فَعَثَرَتِ النَّاقَةُ الْعَضْبَاءُ وَنَدَرَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم وَنَدَرَتْ فَقَامَ فَسَتَرَهَا وَقَدْ أَشْرَفَتِ النِّسَاءُ فَقُلْنَ أَبْعَدَ اللَّهُ الْيَهُودِيَّةَ ‏.‏ قَالَ قُلْتُ يَا أَبَا حَمْزَةَ أَوَقَعَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم قَالَ إِي وَاللَّهِ لَقَدْ وَقَعَ ‏.
وَحَدَّثَنَا أَبُو بَكْرِ بْنُ أَبِي شَيْبَةَ، حَدَّثَنَا شَبَابَةُ، حَدَّثَنَا سُلَيْمَانُ، عَنْ ثَابِثٍ، عَنْ أَنَسٍ، ح وَحَدَّثَنِي بِهِ عَبْدُ اللَّهِ بْنُ هَاشِمِ بْنِ حَيَّانَ، - وَاللَّفْظُ لَهُ - حَدَّثَنَا بَهْزٌ، حَدَّثَنَا سُلَيْمَانُ، بْنُ الْمُغِيرَةِ عَنْ ثَابِتٍ، حَدَّثَنَا أَنَسٌ، قَالَ صَارَتْ صَفِيَّةُ لِدَحْيَةَ فِي مَقْسَمِهِ وَجَعَلُوا يَمْدَحُونَهَا عِنْدَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم - قَالَ - وَيَقُولُونَ مَا رَأَيْنَا فِي السَّبْىِ مِثْلَهَا - قَالَ - فَبَعَثَ إِلَى دِحْيَةَ فَأَعْطَاهُ بِهَا مَا أَرَادَ ثُمَّ دَفَعَهَا إِلَى أُمِّي فَقَالَ ‏"‏ أَصْلِحِيهَا ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قَالَ ثُمَّ خَرَجَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم مِنْ خَيْبَرَ حَتَّى إِذَا جَعَلَهَا فِي ظَهْرِهِ نَزَلَ ثُمَّ ضَرَبَ عَلَيْهَا الْقُبَّةَ فَلَمَّا أَصْبَحَ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏"‏ مَنْ كَانَ عِنْدَهُ فَضْلُ زَادٍ فَلْيَأْتِنَا بِهِ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قَالَ فَجَعَلَ الرَّجُلُ يَجِيءُ بِفَضْلِ التَّمْرِ وَفَضْلِ السَّوِيقِ حَتَّى جَعَلُوا مِنْ ذَلِكَ سَوَادًا حَيْسًا فَجَعَلُوا يَأْكُلُونَ مِنْ ذَلِكَ الْحَيْسِ وَيَشْرَبُونَ مِنْ حِيَاضٍ إِلَى جَنْبِهِمْ مِنْ مَاءِ السَّمَاءِ - قَالَ - فَقَالَ أَنَسٌ فَكَانَتْ تِلْكَ وَلِيمَةَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم عَلَيْهَا - قَالَ - فَانْطَلَقْنَا حَتَّى إِذَا رَأَيْنَا جُدُرَ الْمَدِينَةِ هَشِشْنَا إِلَيْهَا فَرَفَعْنَا مَطِيَّنَا وَرَفَعَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم مَطِيَّتَهُ - قَالَ - وَصَفِيَّةُ خَلْفَهُ قَدْ أَرْدَفَهَا رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم - قَالَ - فَعَثَرَتْ مَطِيَّةُ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فَصُرِعَ وَصُرِعَتْ قَالَ فَلَيْسَ أَحَدٌ مِنَ النَّاسِ يَنْظُرُ إِلَيْهِ وَلاَ إِلَيْهَا حَتَّى قَامَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فَسَتَرَهَا - قَالَ - فَأَتَيْنَاهُ فَقَالَ ‏"‏ لَمْ نُضَرَّ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قَالَ فَدَخَلْنَا الْمَدِينَةَ فَخَرَجَ جَوَارِي نِسَائِهِ يَتَرَاءَيْنَهَا وَيَشْمَتْنَ بِصَرْعَتِهَا ‏.‏
وَحَدَّثَنِي زُهَيْرُ بْنُ حَرْبٍ، حَدَّثَنَا إِسْمَاعِيلُ، - يَعْنِي ابْنَ عُلَيَّةَ - عَنْ عَبْدِ الْعَزِيزِ، بْنِ صُهَيْبٍ عَنْ أَنَسٍ، أَنَّ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم غَزَا خَيْبَرَ قَالَ فَصَلَّيْنَا عِنْدَهَا صَلاَةَ الْغَدَاةِ بِغَلَسٍ فَرَكِبَ نَبِيُّ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم وَرَكِبَ أَبُو طَلْحَةَ وَأَنَا رَدِيفُ أَبِي طَلْحَةَ فَأَجْرَى نَبِيُّ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فِي زُقَاقِ خَيْبَرَ وَإِنَّ رُكْبَتِي لَتَمَسُّ فَخِذَ نَبِيِّ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم وَانْحَسَرَ الإِزَارُ عَنْ فَخِذِ نَبِيِّ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم وَإِنِّي لأَرَى بَيَاضَ فَخِذِ نَبِيِّ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فَلَمَّا دَخَلَ الْقَرْيَةَ قَالَ ‏ "‏ اللَّهُ أَكْبَرُ خَرِبَتْ خَيْبَرُ إِنَّا إِذَا نَزَلْنَا بِسَاحَةِ قَوْمٍ فَسَاءَ صَبَاحُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ ‏" ‏ ‏.‏ قَالَهَا ثَلاَثَ مِرَارٍ قَالَ وَقَدْ خَرَجَ الْقَوْمُ إِلَى أَعْمَالِهِمْ فَقَالُوا مُحَمَّدٌ - قَالَ عَبْدُ الْعَزِيزِ وَقَالَ بَعْضُ أَصْحَابِنَا - وَالْخَمِيسَ قَالَ وَأَصَبْنَاهَا عَنْوَةً ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو بَكْرِ بْنُ أَبِي شَيْبَةَ، حَدَّثَنَا عَفَّانُ، حَدَّثَنَا حَمَّادُ بْنُ سَلَمَةَ، حَدَّثَنَا ثَابِتٌ، عَنْ أَنَسٍ، قَالَ كُنْتُ رِدْفَ أَبِي طَلْحَةَ يَوْمَ خَيْبَرَ وَقَدَمِي تَمَسُّ قَدَمَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم قَالَ فَأَتَيْنَاهُمْ حِينَ بَزَغَتِ الشَّمْسُ وَقَدْ أَخْرَجُوا مَوَاشِيَهُمْ وَخَرَجُوا بِفُئُوسِهِمْ وَمَكَاتِلِهِمْ وَمُرُورِهِمْ فَقَالُوا مُحَمَّدٌ وَالْخَمِيسَ ‏.‏ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏ "‏ خَرِبَتْ خَيْبَرُ إِنَّا إِذَا نَزَلْنَا بِسَاحَةِ قَوْمٍ فَسَاءَ صَبَاحُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ ‏" ‏ ‏.‏ قَالَ فَهَزَمَهُمُ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ ‏.‏
حَدَّثَنَا إِسْحَاقُ بْنُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ، وَإِسْحَاقُ بْنُ مَنْصُورٍ، قَالاَ أَخْبَرَنَا النَّضْرُ بْنُ شُمَيْلٍ، أَخْبَرَنَا شُعْبَةُ، عَنْ قَتَادَةَ، عَنْ أَنَسِ بْنِ مَالِكٍ، قَالَ لَمَّا أَتَى رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم خَيْبَرَ قَالَ ‏ "‏ إِنَّا إِذَا نَزَلْنَا بِسَاحَةِ قَوْمٍ فَسَاءَ صَبَاحُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ ‏" ‏ ‏.‏
