URL: https://quranx.com/hadith/Muslim/Hadith-1748
REFS: Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1748a ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 19, Hadith 4328 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1748b ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 19, Hadith 4329 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1748c ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 31, Hadith 5933 ; Collection Sahih Muslim ; Reference Hadith 1748d ; USC-MSA web (English) reference Book 31, Hadith 5934
EN: A hadith has been narrated by Mus'ab b. Sa'd who heard it from his father as saying: My father took a sword from Khums and brought it to the Prophet (ﷺ) and said: Grant it to me. He refused. At this Allah revealed (the Qur'anic verse):" They ask thee concerning the spoils of war. Say: The spoils of war are for Allah and the Apostle" (viii. 1).
A hadith has been narrated by Mus'ab b. Sa'd who heard it from his father as saying: " Four verses of the Qur'an have been revealed about me. I found a sword (among the spoils of war). It was brought to the Prophet (ﷺ). He (my father) said: Messenger of Allah, bestow it upon me. The Apostle of Allah (ﷺ) said: Place it there. Then he (my father) stood up and the Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) said to him: Place it from where you got it. (At this) he (my father) said again: Messenger of Allah, bestow it upon me Shall I be treated like one who has no share in (the booty)? The Apostle of Allah (may peace be upon him said: Place it from where you got it. At this was revealed the verse:" They ask thee about the spoils of war.... Say: The spoils of war are for Allah and the Messenger"
Mus'ab b. Sa'd reported on the authority of his father that many verses of the Qur'an had been revealed in connection with him. His mother Umm Sa'd had taken oath that she would never talk with him until he abandoned his faith and she neither ate nor drank and said: Allah has commanded you to treat well your parents and I am your mother and I command you to do this. She passed three days in this state until she fainted because of extreme hunger and at that time her son whose name was Umara stood up and served her drink and she began to curse Sa'd that Allah, the Exalted and Glorions, revealed these verses of the Holy Qur'an:" And We have enjoined upon a person goodness to his parents but if they contend with thee to associate (others) with Me of which you have no knowledge, then obey them not" (xxix. 8) ; Treat thein with customary good in this world" (xxxi. 15). He also reported that there fell to the lot of Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) huge spoils of war and there was one sword in them. I picked that up and came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and said: Bestow this sword upon me (as my share in the spoils of war) and you know my state. Thereupon he said: Return it to the place from where you picked it up. I went back until I decided to throw it in a store but my soul repulsed me so I came back and asked him to give that sword to me. He said in a loud voice to return it to the place from where I had picked it up. It was on this occasion that this verse was revealed:" They asked about the spoils of war" (viii. 1). He further said: I once fell ill and sent a message to Allah's Apostle (ﷺ). He visited me and I said to him: Permit me to distribute (in charity) my property as much as I like. He did not agree. I said: (Permit me to distribute) half of it. He did not agree. I said: (Permit me to distribute) the third part, whereupon he kept quiet and it was after this (that the distribution of one's property in charity) to the extent of one-third was held valid. He further said: I came to a group of persons of the Ansir and Muhajirin and they said: Come, so that we may serve you wine, and it was before the use of wine had been prohibited. I went to them in a garden and there had been with them the roasted head of a camel and a small water-skin containing wine. I ate and drank along with them and there came under discussion the Ansr (Helpers) and Muhajirin (immigrants). I said: The immigrants are better than the Ansar, that a person picked up a portion of the head (of the camel and struck me with it that my nose was injured. I came to Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and informed him of the situation that Aliah, the Exalted and Glorious, revealed verses pertaining to wine:" Intoxicants and the games of chance and (sacrificing to) stones set up and (divining by) arrows are only an uncleanliness, the devil's work" (v. 90).
This hadith has been transmitted on the authority of Simak and the hadith transmitted on the authority of Shu'ba (the words are): When they intended to feed her (Sa'd'. s mother), they opened her mouth with the help of a stick and then put the feed in her mouth, and in the same hadith the words are: He struck the nose of Sa'd and it was injured and Sa'd had (the mark) of wound on his nose.
AR: وَحَدَّثَنَا قُتَيْبَةُ بْنُ سَعِيدٍ، حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو عَوَانَةَ، عَنْ سِمَاكٍ، عَنْ مُصْعَبِ بْنِ سَعْدٍ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ، قَالَ أَخَذَ أَبِي مِنَ الْخُمْسِ سَيْفًا فَأَتَى بِهِ النَّبِيَّ صلى الله عليه وسلم فَقَالَ هَبْ لِي هَذَا ‏.‏ فَأَبَى فَأَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ ‏{‏ يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الأَنْفَالِ قُلِ الأَنْفَالُ لِلَّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ‏}‏
حَدَّثَنَا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ الْمُثَنَّى، وَابْنُ، بَشَّارٍ - وَاللَّفْظُ لاِبْنِ الْمُثَنَّى - قَالاَ حَدَّثَنَا مُحَمَّدُ، بْنُ جَعْفَرٍ حَدَّثَنَا شُعْبَةُ، عَنْ سِمَاكِ بْنِ حَرْبٍ، عَنْ مُصْعَبِ بْنِ سَعْدٍ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ، قَالَ نَزَلَتْ فِيَّ أَرْبَعُ آيَاتٍ أَصَبْتُ سَيْفًا فَأَتَى بِهِ النَّبِيَّ صلى الله عليه وسلم فَقَالَ يَا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ نَفِّلْنِيهِ ‏.‏ فَقَالَ ‏"‏ ضَعْهُ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ ثُمَّ قَامَ فَقَالَ لَهُ النَّبِيُّ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏"‏ ضَعْهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ أَخَذْتَهُ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ ثُمَّ قَامَ فَقَالَ نَفِّلْنِيهِ يَا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ ‏.‏ فَقَالَ ‏"‏ ضَعْهُ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ فَقَامَ فَقَالَ يَا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ نَفِّلْنِيهِ أَأُجْعَلُ كَمَنْ لاَ غَنَاءَ لَهُ فَقَالَ لَهُ النَّبِيُّ صلى الله عليه وسلم ‏"‏ ضَعْهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ أَخَذْتَهَ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قَالَ فَنَزَلَتْ هَذِهِ الآيَةُ ‏{‏ يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الأَنْفَالِ قُلِ الأَنْفَالُ لِلَّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ‏}‏
حَدَّثَنَا أَبُو بَكْرِ بْنُ أَبِي شَيْبَةَ، وَزُهَيْرُ بْنُ حَرْبٍ، قَالاَ حَدَّثَنَا الْحَسَنُ بْنُ مُوسَى، حَدَّثَنَا زُهَيْرٌ، حَدَّثَنَا سِمَاكُ بْنُ حَرْبٍ، حَدَّثَنِي مُصْعَبُ بْنُ سَعْدٍ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ، أَنَّهُ نَزَلَتْ فِيهِ آيَاتٌ مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ - قَالَ - حَلَفَتْ أُمُّ سَعْدٍ أَنْ لاَ تُكَلِّمَهُ أَبَدًا حَتَّى يَكْفُرَ بِدِينِهِ وَلاَ تَأْكُلَ وَلاَ تَشْرَبَ ‏.‏ قَالَتْ زَعَمْتَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ وَصَّاكَ بِوَالِدَيْكَ وَأَنَا أُمُّكَ وَأَنَا آمُرُكَ بِهَذَا ‏.‏ قَالَ مَكَثَتْ ثَلاَثًا حَتَّى غُشِيَ عَلَيْهَا مِنَ الْجَهْدِ فَقَامَ ابْنٌ لَهَا يُقَالُ لَهُ عُمَارَةُ فَسَقَاهَا فَجَعَلَتْ تَدْعُو عَلَى سَعْدٍ فَأَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِي الْقُرْآنِ هَذِهِ الآيَةَ ‏{‏ وَوَصَّيْنَا الإِنْسَانَ بِوَالِدَيْهِ حُسْنًا‏}‏ ‏{‏ وَإِنْ جَاهَدَاكَ عَلَى أَنْ تُشْرِكَ بِي‏}‏ وَفِيهَا ‏{‏ وَصَاحِبْهُمَا فِي الدُّنْيَا مَعْرُوفًا‏}‏ قَالَ وَأَصَابَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم غَنِيمَةً عَظِيمَةً فَإِذَا فِيهَا سَيْفٌ فَأَخَذْتُهُ فَأَتَيْتُ بِهِ الرَّسُولَ صلى الله عليه وسلم فَقُلْتُ نَفِّلْنِي هَذَا السَّيْفَ فَأَنَا مَنْ قَدْ عَلِمْتَ حَالَهُ ‏.‏ فَقَالَ ‏"‏ رُدُّهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ أَخَذْتَهُ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ فَانْطَلَقْتُ حَتَّى إِذَا أَرَدْتُ أَنْ أُلْقِيَهُ فِي الْقَبَضِ لاَمَتْنِي نَفْسِي فَرَجَعْتُ إِلَيْهِ فَقُلْتُ أَعْطِنِيهِ ‏.‏ قَالَ فَشَدَّ لِي صَوْتَهُ ‏"‏ رُدُّهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ أَخَذْتَهُ ‏"‏ ‏.‏ قَالَ فَأَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ ‏{‏ يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الأَنْفَالِ‏}‏ قَالَ وَمَرِضْتُ فَأَرْسَلْتُ إِلَى النَّبِيِّ صلى الله عليه وسلم فَأَتَانِي فَقُلْتُ دَعْنِي أَقْسِمْ مَالِي حَيْثُ شِئْتُ ‏.‏ قَالَ فَأَبَى ‏.‏ قُلْتُ فَالنِّصْفَ ‏.‏ قَالَ فَأَبَى ‏.‏ قُلْتُ فَالثُّلُثَ ‏.‏ قَالَ فَسَكَتَ فَكَانَ بَعْدُ الثُّلُثُ جَائِزًا ‏.‏ قَالَ وَأَتَيْتُ عَلَى نَفَرٍ مِنَ الأَنْصَارِ وَالْمُهَاجِرِينَ فَقَالُوا تَعَالَ نُطْعِمْكَ وَنَسْقِيكَ خَمْرًا ‏.‏ وَذَلِكَ قَبْلَ أَنْ تُحَرَّمَ الْخَمْرُ - قَالَ - فَأَتَيْتُهُمْ فِي حَشٍّ - وَالْحَشُّ الْبُسْتَانُ - فَإِذَا رَأْسُ جَزُورٍ مَشْوِيٌّ عِنْدَهُمْ وَزِقٌّ مِنْ خَمْرٍ - قَالَ - فَأَكَلْتُ وَشَرِبْتُ مَعَهُمْ - قَالَ - فَذُكِرَتِ الأَنْصَارُ وَالْمُهَاجِرُونَ عِنْدَهُمْ فَقُلْتُ الْمُهَاجِرُونَ خَيْرٌ مِنَ الأَنْصَارِ - قَالَ - فَأَخَذَ رَجُلٌ أَحَدَ لَحْيَىِ الرَّأْسِ فَضَرَبَنِي بِهِ فَجَرَحَ بِأَنْفِي فَأَتَيْتُ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ صلى الله عليه وسلم فَأَخْبَرْتُهُ فَأَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِيَّ - يَعْنِي نَفْسَهُ - شَأْنَ الْخَمْرِ ‏{‏ إِنَّمَا الْخَمْرُ وَالْمَيْسِرُ وَالأَنْصَابُ وَالأَزْلاَمُ رِجْسٌ مِنْ عَمَلِ الشَّيْطَانِ‏}‏
حَدَّثَنَا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ الْمُثَنَّى، وَمُحَمَّدُ بْنُ بَشَّارٍ، قَالاَ حَدَّثَنَا مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ جَعْفَرٍ، حَدَّثَنَا شُعْبَةُ، عَنْ سِمَاكِ بْنِ حَرْبٍ، عَنْ مُصْعَبِ بْنِ سَعْدٍ، عَنْ أَبِيهِ، أَنَّهُ قَالَ أُنْزِلَتْ فِيَّ أَرْبَعُ آيَاتٍ ‏.‏ وَسَاقَ الْحَدِيثَ بِمَعْنَى حَدِيثِ زُهَيْرٍ عَنْ سِمَاكٍ وَزَادَ فِي حَدِيثِ شُعْبَةَ قَالَ فَكَانُوا إِذَا أَرَادُوا أَنْ يُطْعِمُوهَا شَجَرُوا فَاهَا بِعَصًا ثُمَّ أَوْجَرُوهَا ‏.‏ وَفِي حَدِيثِهِ أَيْضًا فَضَرَبَ بِهِ أَنْفَ سَعْدٍ فَفَزَرَهُ وَكَانَ أَنْفُ سَعْدٍ مَفْزُورًا ‏.‏
